PRESENT DAY


It was a summer evening; the sun was setting; the sky was blue
still, but tinged with gold, as if a thin veil of gauze hung over
it, and here and there in the gold-blue amplitude an island of
cloud lay suspended.  In the fields the trees stood majestically
caparisoned, with their innumerable leaves gilt.  Sheep and cows,
pearl white and parti-coloured, lay recumbent or munched their way
through the half transparent grass.  An edge of light surrounded
everything.  A red-gold fume rose from the dust on the roads.  Even
the little red brick villas on the high roads had become porous,
incandescent with light, and the flowers in cottage gardens, lilac
and pink like cotton dresses, shone veined as if lit from within.
Faces of people standing at cottage doors or padding along
pavements showed the same red glow as they fronted the slowly
sinking sun.



Eleanor came out of her flat and shut the door.  Her face was lit
up by the glow of the sun as it sank over London, and for a moment
she was dazzled and looked out over the roofs and spires that lay
beneath.  There were people talking inside her room, and she wanted
to have a word with her nephew alone.  North, her brother Morris's
son, had just come back from Africa, and she had scarcely seen him
alone.  So many people had dropped in that evening--Miriam Parrish;
Ralph Pickersgill; Antony Wedd; her niece Peggy, and on top of them
all, that very talkative man, her friend Nicholas Pomjalovsky, whom
they called Brown for short.  She had scarcely had a word with
North alone.  For a moment they stood in the bright square of
sunshine that fell on the stone floor of the passage.  Voices were
still talking within.  She put her hand on his shoulder.

"It's so nice to see you," she said.  "And you haven't changed . . ."
She looked at him.  She still saw traces of the brown-eyed
cricketing boy in the massive man, who was so burnt, and a little
grey too over the ears.  "We sha'n't let you go back," she
continued, beginning to walk downstairs with him, "to that horrid
farm."

He smiled.  "And you haven't changed either," he said.

She looked very vigorous.  She had been in India.  Her face was
tanned with the sun.  With her white hair and her brown cheeks she
scarcely looked her age, but she must be well over seventy, he was
thinking.  They walked downstairs arm-in-arm.  There were six
flights of stone steps to descend, but she insisted upon coming all
the way down with him, to see him off.

"And North," she said, when they reached the hall, "you will be
careful. . . ."  She stopped on the doorstep.  "Driving in London,"
she said, "isn't the same as driving in Africa."

There was his little sports car outside; a man was going past the
door in the evening sunlight crying "Old chairs and baskets to
mend."

He shook his head; his voice was drowned by the voice of the man
crying.  He glanced at a board that hung in the hall with names on
it.  Who was in and who was out was signified with a care that
amused him slightly, after Africa.  The voice of the man crying
"Old chairs and baskets to mend," slowly died away.

"Well, good-bye, Eleanor," he said turning.  "We shall meet later."
He got into his car.

"Oh, but North--" she cried, suddenly remembering something she
wanted to say to him.  But he had turned on the engine; he did not
hear her voice.  He waved his hand to her--there she stood at the
top of the steps with her hair blowing in the wind.  The car
started off with a jerk.  She gave another wave of her hand to him
as he turned the corner.

Eleanor is just the same, he thought: more erratic perhaps.  With a
room full of people--her little room had been crowded--she had
insisted upon showing him her new shower-bath.  "You press that
knob," she had said, "and look--"  Innumerable needles of water
shot down.  He laughed aloud.  They had sat on the edge of the bath
together.

But the cars behind him hooted persistently; they hooted and
hooted.  What at? he asked.  Suddenly he realised that they were
hooting at him.  The light had changed; it was green now, he had
been blocking the way.  He started off with a violent jerk.  He had
not mastered the art of driving in London.

The noise of London still seemed to him deafening, and the speed at
which people drove was terrifying.  But it was exciting after
Africa.  The shops even, he thought, as he shot past rows of plate-
glass windows, were marvellous.  Along the kerb, too, there were
barrows of fruit and flowers.  Everywhere there was profusion;
plenty. . . .  Again the red light shone out; he pulled up.

He looked about him.  He was somewhere in Oxford Street; the
pavement was crowded with people; jostling each other; swarming
round the plate-glass windows which were still lit up.  The gaiety,
the colour, the variety, were amazing after Africa.  All these
years, he thought to himself, looking at a floating banner of
transparent silk, he had been used to raw goods; hides and fleeces;
here was the finished article.  A dressing-case, of yellow leather
fitted with silver bottles, caught his eye.  But the light was
green again.  On he jerked.

He had only been back ten days, and his mind was a jumble of odds
and ends.  It seemed to him that he had never stopped talking:
shaking hands; saying How-d'you-do?  People sprang up everywhere;
his father; his sister; old men got up from armchairs and said, You
don't remember me?  Children he had left in the nursery were grown-
up men at college; girls with pigtails were now married women.  He
was still confused by it all; they talked so fast; they must think
him very slow, he thought.  He had to withdraw into the window and
say, "What, what, what do they mean by it?"

For instance, this evening at Eleanor's there was a man there with
a foreign accent who squeezed lemon into his tea.  Who might he be,
he wondered?  "One of Nell's dentists," said his sister Peggy,
wrinkling her lip.  For they all had lines cut; phrases ready-made.
But that was the silent man on the sofa.  It was the other one he
meant--squeezing lemon in his tea.  "We call him Brown," she
murmured.  Why Brown if he's a foreigner, he wondered.  Anyhow they
all romanticized solitude and savagery--"I wish I'd done what you
did," said a little man called Pickersgill--except this man Brown,
who had said something that interested him.  "If we do not know
ourselves, how can we know other people?" he had said.  They had
been discussing dictators; Napoleon; the psychology of great men.
But there was the green light--"GO".  He shot on again.  And then
the lady with the ear-rings gushed about the beauties of Nature.
He glanced at the name of the street on the left.  He was going to
dine with Sara but he had not much notion how to get there.  He had
only heard her voice on the telephone saying, "Come and dine with
me--Milton Street, fifty-two, my name's on the door."  It was near
the Prison Tower.  But this man Brown--it was difficult to place
him at once.  He talked, spreading his fingers out with the
volubility of a man who will in the end become a bore.  And Eleanor
wandered about, holding a cup, telling people about her shower-
bath.  He wished they would stick to the point.  Talk interested
him.  Serious talk on abstract subjects.  "Was solitude good; was
society bad?"  That was interesting; but they hopped from thing to
thing.  When the large man said, "Solitary confinement is the
greatest torture we inflict," the meagre old woman with the wispy
hair at once piped up, laying her hand on her heart, "It ought to
be abolished!"  She visited prisons, it seemed.

"Where the dickens am I now?" he asked, peering at the name on the
street corner.  Somebody had chalked a circle on the wall with a
jagged line in it.  He looked down the long vista.  Door after
door, window after window, repeated the same pattern.  There was a
red-yellow glow over it all, for the sun was sinking through the
London dust.  Everything was tinged with a warm yellow haze.
Barrows full of fruit and flowers were drawn up at the kerb.  The
sun gilded the fruit; the flowers had a blurred brilliance; there
were roses, carnations and lilies too.  He had half a mind to stop
and buy a bunch to take to Sally.  But the cars were hooting behind
him.  He went on.  A bunch of flowers, he thought, held in the hand
would soften the awkwardness of meeting and the usual things that
had to be said.  "How nice to see you--you've filled out," and so
on.  He had only heard her voice on the telephone, and people
changed after all these years.  Whether this was the right street
or not, he could not be sure; he filtered slowly round the corner.
Then stopped; then went on again.  This was Milton Street, a dusky
street, with old houses, now let out as lodgings; but they had seen
better days.

"The odds on that side; the evens on this," he said.  The street
was blocked with vans.  He hooted.  He stopped.  He hooted again.
A man went to the horse's head, for it was a coal-cart, and the
horse slowly plodded on.  Fifty-two was just along the row.  He
dribbled up to the door.  He stopped.

A voice pealed out across the street, the voice of a woman singing
scales.

"What a dirty," he said, as he sat still in the car for a moment--
here a woman crossed the street with a jug under her arm--"sordid,"
he added, "low-down street to live in."  He cut off his engine; got
out, and examined the names on the door.  Names mounted one above
another; here on a visiting-card, here engraved on brass--Foster;
Abrahamson; Roberts; S. Pargiter was near the top, punched on a
strip of aluminium.  He rang one of the many bells.  No one came.
The woman went on singing scales, mounting slowly.  The mood comes,
the mood goes, he thought.  He used to write poetry; now the mood
had come again as he stood there waiting.  He pressed the bell two
or three times sharply.  But no one answered.  Then he gave the
door a push; it was open.  There was a curious smell in the hall;
of vegetables cooking; and the oily brown paper made it dark.  He
went up the stairs of what had once been a gentleman's residence.
The banisters were carved; but they had been daubed over with some
cheap yellow varnish.  He mounted slowly and stood on the landing,
uncertain which door to knock at.  He was always finding himself
now outside the doors of strange houses.  He had a feeling that he
was no one and nowhere in particular.  From across the road came
the voice of the singer deliberately ascending the scale, as if the
notes were stairs; and here she stopped indolently, languidly,
flinging out the voice that was nothing but pure sound.  Then he
heard somebody inside, laughing.

That's her voice, he said.  But there is somebody with her.  He was
annoyed.  He had hoped to find her alone.  The voice was speaking
and did not answer when he knocked.  Very cautiously he opened the
door and went in.

"Yes, yes, yes," Sara was saying.  She was kneeling at the
telephone talking; but there was nobody there.  She raised her hand
when she saw him and smiled at him; but she kept her hand raised as
if the noise he had made caused her to lose what she was trying to
hear.

"What?" she said, speaking into the telephone.  "What?"  He stood
silent, looking at the silhouettes of his grandparents on the
mantelpiece.  There were no flowers, he observed.  He wished he had
brought her some.  He listened to what she was saying; he tried to
piece it together.

"Yes, now I can hear. . . .  Yes, you're right.  Someone has come
in. . . .  Who?  North.  My cousin from Africa. . . ."

That's me, North thought.  "My cousin from Africa."  That's my
label.

"You've met him?" she was saying.  There was a pause.  "D'you think
so?" she said.  She turned and looked at him.  They must be
discussing him, he thought.  He felt uncomfortable.

"Good-bye," she said, and put down the telephone.

"He says he met you tonight," she said, going up to him and taking
his hand.  "And liked you," she added, smiling.

"Who was that?" he asked, feeling awkward; but he had no flowers to
give her.

"A man you met at Eleanor's," she said.

"A foreigner?" he asked.

"Yes.  Called Brown," she said, pushing up a chair for him.

He sat down on the chair she had pushed out for him, and she curled
up opposite with her foot under her.  He remembered the attitude;
she came back in sections; first the voice; then the attitude; but
something remained unknown.

"You've not changed," he said--the face he meant.  A plain face
scarcely changed; whereas beautiful faces wither.  She looked
neither young nor old; but shabby; and the room, with the pampas
grass in a pot in the corner, was untidy.  A lodging-house room
tidied in a hurry he guessed.

"And you--" she said, looking at him.  It was as if she were trying
to put two different versions of him together; the one on the
telephone perhaps and the one on the chair.  Or was there some
other?  This half knowing people, this half being known, this
feeling of the eye on the flesh, like a fly crawling--how
uncomfortable it was, he thought; but inevitable, after all these
years.  The tables were littered; he hesitated, holding his hat in
his hand.  She smiled at him, as he sat there, holding his hat
uncertainly.

"Who's the young Frenchman," she said, "with the top hat in the
picture?"

"What picture?" he asked.

"The one who sits looking puzzled with his hat in his hand," she
said.  He put his hat on the table, but awkwardly.  A book fell to
the floor.

"Sorry," he said.  She meant, presumably, when she compared him to
the puzzled man in the picture, that he was clumsy; he always had
been.

"This isn't the room where I came last time?" he asked.

He recognised a chair--a chair with gilt claws; there was the usual
piano.

"No--that was on the other side of the river," she said, "when you
came to say good-bye."

He remembered.  He had come to her the evening before he left for
the war; and he had hung his cap on the bust of their grandfather--
that had vanished.  And she had mocked him.

"How many lumps of sugar does a lieutenant in His Majesty's Royal
Regiment of Rat-catchers require?" she had sneered.  He could see
her now dropping lumps of sugar into his tea.  And they had
quarrelled.  And he had left her.  It was the night of the raid, he
remembered.  He remembered the dark night; the searchlights that
slowly swept over the sky; here and there they stopped to ponder a
fleecy patch; little pellets of shot fell; and people scudded along
the empty blue shrouded streets.  He had been going to Kensington
to dine with his family; he had said good-bye to his mother; he had
never seen her again.

The voice of the singer interrupted.  "Ah--h-h, oh-h-h, ah--h-h,
oh--h-h," she sang, languidly climbing up and down the scale on the
other side of the street.

"Does she go on like that every night?" he asked.  Sara nodded.
The notes coming through the humming evening air sounded slow and
sensuous.  The singer seemed to have endless leisure; she could
rest on every stair.

And there was no sign of dinner, he observed; only a dish of fruit
on the cheap lodging-house tablecloth, already yellowed with some
gravy stain.

"Why d'you always choose slums--" he was beginning, for children
were screaming in the street below, when the door opened and a girl
came in carrying a bunch of knives and forks.  The regular lodging-
house skivvy, North thought; with red hands, and one of those
jaunty white caps that girls in lodging-houses clap on top of their
hair when the lodger has a party.  In her presence they had to make
conversation.  "I've been seeing Eleanor," he said.  "That was
where I met your friend Brown. . . ."

The girl made a clatter laying the table with the knives and forks
she held in a bunch.

"Oh, Eleanor," said Sara.  "Eleanor--"  But she watched the girl
going clumsily round the table; she breathed rather hard as she
laid it.

"She's just back from India," he said.  He too watched the girl
laying the table.  Now she stood a bottle of wine among the cheap
lodging-house crockery.

"Gallivanting round the world," Sara murmured.

"And entertaining the oddest set of old fogies," he added.  He
thought of the little man with the fierce blue eyes who wished he
had been in Africa; and the wispy woman with beads who visited
prisons it seemed.

". . . and that man, your friend--" he began.  Here the girl went
out of the room, but she left the door open, a sign that she was
about to come back.

"Nicholas," said Sara, finishing his sentence.  "The man you call
Brown."

There was a pause.  "And what did you talk about?" she asked.

He tried to remember.

"Napoleon; the psychology of great men; if we don't know ourselves
how can we know other people . . ."  He stopped.  It was difficult
to remember accurately what had been said even one hour ago.

"And then," she said, holding out one hand and touching a finger
exactly as Brown had done, "--how can we make laws, religions, that
fit, that fit, when we don't know ourselves?"

"Yes!  Yes!" he exclaimed.  She had caught his manner exactly; the
slight foreign accent; the repetition of the little word "fit", as
if he were not quite sure of the shorter words in English.

"And Eleanor," Sara continued, "says . . . 'Can we improve--can we
improve ourselves?' sitting on the edge of the sofa?"

"Of the bath," he laughed, correcting her.

"You've had that talk before," he said.  That was precisely what he
was feeling.  They had talked before.  "And then," he continued,
"we discussed. . . ."

But here the girl burst in again.  She had plates in her hand this
time; blue-ringed plates, cheap lodging-house plates: "--society or
solitude; which is best," he finished his sentence.

Sara kept looking at the table.  "And which," she asked, in the
distracted way of someone who with their surface senses watches
what is being done, but at the same time thinks of something else
"--which did you say?  You who've been alone all these years," she
said.  The girl left the room again.  "--among your sheep, North."
She broke off; for now a trombone player had struck up in the
street below, and as the voice of the woman practising her scales
continued, they sounded like two people trying to express
completely different views of the world in general at one and the
same time.  The voice ascended; the trombone wailed.  They laughed.

". . . Sitting on the verandah," she resumed, "looking at the
stars."

He looked up: was she quoting something?  He remembered he had
written to her when he first went out.  "Yes, looking at the
stars," he said.

"Sitting on the verandah in the silence," she added.  A van went
past the window.  All sounds were for the moment obliterated.

"And then . . ." she said as the van rattled away--she paused as if
she were referring to something else that he had written.

"--then you saddled a horse," she said, "and rode away!"

She jumped up, and for the first time he saw her face in the full
light.  There was a smudge on the side of her nose.

"D'you know," he said, looking at her, "that you've a smudge on
your face?"

She touched the wrong cheek.

"Not that side--the other," he said.

She left the room without looking in the glass.  From which we
deduce the fact, he said to himself, as if he were writing a novel,
that Miss Sara Pargiter has never attracted the love of men.  Or
had she?  He did not know.  These little snapshot pictures of
people left much to be desired, these little surface pictures that
one made, like a fly crawling over a face, and feeling, here's the
nose, here's the brow.



He strolled to the window.  The sun must be setting, for the brick
of the house at the corner blushed a yellowish pink.  One or two
high windows were burnished gold.  The girl was in the room, and
she distracted him; also the noise of London still bothered him.
Against the dull background of traffic noises, of wheels turning
and brakes squeaking, there rose near at hand the cry of a woman
suddenly alarmed for her child; the monotonous cry of a man selling
vegetables; and far away a barrel organ was playing.  It stopped;
it began again.  I used to write to her, he thought, late at night,
when I felt lonely, when I was young.  He looked at himself in the
glass.  He saw his sunburnt face with the broad cheek bones and the
little brown eyes.

The girl had been sucked down into the lower portion of the house.
The door stood open.  Nothing seemed to be happening.  He waited.
He felt an outsider.  After all these years, he thought, everyone
was paired off; settled down; busy with their own affairs.  You
found them telephoning, remembering other conversations; they went
out of the room; they left one alone.  He took up a book and read a
sentence.

"A shadow like an angel with bright hair . . ."



Next moment she came in.  But there seemed to be some hitch in the
proceedings.  The door was open; the table laid; but nothing
happened.  They stood together, waiting, with their backs to the
fireplace.

"How strange it must be," she resumed, "coming back after all these
years--as if you'd dropped from the clouds in an aeroplane," she
pointed to the table as if that were the field in which he had
landed.

"On to an unknown land," said North.  He leant forward and touched
a knife on the table.

"--and finding people talking," she added.

"--talking, talking," he said, "about money and politics," he
added, giving the fender behind him a vicious little kick with his
heel.

Here the girl came in.  She wore an air of importance derived
apparently from the dish she carried, for it was covered with a
great metal cover.  She raised the cover with a certain flourish.
There was a leg of mutton underneath.  "Let's dine," said Sara.

"I'm hungry," he added.

They sat down and she took the carving-knife and made a long
incision.  A thin trickle of red juice ran out; it was underdone.
She looked at it.

"Mutton oughtn't to be like that," she said.  "Beef--but not
mutton."

They watched the red juice running down into the well of the dish.

"Shall we send it back," she said, "or eat it as it is?"

"Eat it," he said.  "I've eaten far worse joints than this," he
added.

"In Africa . . ." she said, lifting the lids of the vegetable
dishes.  There was a slabbed-down mass of cabbage in one oozing
green water; in the other, yellow potatoes that looked hard.

". . . in Africa, in the wilds of Africa," she resumed, helping
him to cabbage, "in that farm you were on, where no one came for
months at a time, and you sat on the verandah listening--"

"To sheep," he said.  He was cutting his mutton into strips.  It
was tough.

"And there was nothing to break the silence," she went on, helping
herself to potatoes, "but a tree falling, or a rock breaking from
the side of a distant mountain--"  She looked at him as if to
verify the sentences that she was quoting from his letters.

"Yes," he said.  "It was very silent."

"And hot," she added.  "Blazing hot at midday: an old tramp tapped
on your door . . . ?"

He nodded.  He saw himself again, a young man, and very lonely.

"And then--" she began again.  But a great lorry came crashing down
the street.  Something rattled on the table.  The walls and the
floor seemed to tremble.  She parted two glasses that were jingling
together.  The lorry passed; they heard it rumbling away in the
distance.

"And the birds," she went on.  "The nightingales, singing in the
moonlight?"

He felt uncomfortable at the vision she called up.  "I must have
written you a lot of nonsense!" he exclaimed.  "I wish you'd torn
them up--those letters!"

"No!  They were beautiful letters!  Wonderful letters!" she
exclaimed, raising her glass.  A thimbleful of wine always made her
tipsy, he remembered.  Her eyes shone; her cheeks glowed.

"And then you had a day off," she went on, "and jolted along a
rough white road in a springless cart to the next town--"

"Sixty miles away," he said.

"And went to a bar; and met a man from the next--ranch?"  She
hesitated as if the word might be the wrong one.

"Ranch, yes, ranch," he confirmed her.  "I went to the town and had
a drink at the bar--"

"And then?" she said.  He laughed.  There were some things he had
not told her.  He was silent.

"Then you stopped writing," she said.  She put her glass down.

"When I forgot what you were like," he said, looking at her.

"You gave up writing too," he said.

"Yes, I too," she said.

The trombone had moved his station and was wailing lugubriously
under the window.  The doleful sound, as if a dog had thrown back
its head and were baying the moon, floated up to them.  She waved
her fork in time to it.

"Our hearts full of tears, our lips full of laughter, we passed on
the stairs"--she dragged her words out to fit the wail of the
trombone--"we passed on the stair-r-r-r-s"--but here the trombone
changed its measure to a jig.  "He to sorrow, I to bliss," she
jigged with it, "he to bliss and I to sorrow, we passed on the
stair-r-r-s."

She set her glass down.

"Another cut off the joint?" she asked.

"No, thank you," he said, looking at the rather stringy
disagreeable object which was still bleeding into the well.  The
willow-pattern plate was daubed with gory streaks.  She stretched
her hand out and rang the bell.  She rang; she rang a second time.
No one came.

"Your bells don't ring," he said.

"No," she smiled.  "The bells don't ring, and the taps don't run."
She thumped on the floor.  They waited.  No one came.  The trombone
wailed outside.

"But there was one letter you wrote me," he continued as they
waited.  "An angry letter; a cruel letter."

He looked at her.  She had lifted her lip like a horse that is
going to bite.  That, too, he remembered.

"Yes?" she said.

"The night you came in from the Strand," he reminded her.

Here the girl came in with the pudding.  It was an ornate pudding,
semi-transparent, pink, ornamented with blobs of cream.

"I remember," said Sara, sticking her spoon into the quivering
jelly, "a still autumn night; the lights lit; and people padding
along the pavement with wreaths in their hands?"

"Yes," he nodded.  "That was it."

"And I said to myself," she paused, "this is Hell.  We are the
damned?"  He nodded.

She helped him to pudding.

"And I," he said, as he took his plate, "was among the damned."  He
stuck his spoon into the quivering mass that she had given him.

"Coward; hypocrite, with your switch in your hand; and your cap on
your head--"  He seemed to quote from a letter that she had written
him.  He paused.  She smiled at him.

"But what was the word--the word I used?" she asked, as if she were
trying to remember.

"Poppycock!" he reminded her.  She nodded.

"And then I went over the bridge," she resumed, raising her spoon
half-way to her mouth, "and stopped in one of those little alcoves,
bays, what d'you call 'em?--scooped out over the water, and looked
down--"  She looked down at her plate.

"When you lived on the other side of the river," he prompted her.

"Stood and looked down," she said, looking at her glass which she
held in front of her, "and thought; Running water, flowing water,
water that crinkles up the lights; moonlight; starlight--"  She
drank and was silent.

"Then the car came," he prompted her.

"Yes; the Rolls-Royce.  It stopped in the lamplight and there they
sat--"

"Two people," he reminded her.

"Two people.  Yes," she said.  "He was smoking a cigar.  An upper-
class Englishman with a big nose, in a dress suit.  And she,
sitting beside him, in a fur-trimmed cloak, took advantage of the
pause under the lamplight to raise her hand"--she raised her hand--
"and polish that spade, her mouth."

She swallowed her mouthful.

"And the peroration?" he prompted her.

She shook her head.

They were silent.  North had finished his pudding.  He took out his
cigarette-case.  Save for a dish of rather fly-blown fruit, apples
and bananas, there was no more to eat apparently.

"We were very foolish when we were young, Sal," he said, as he lit
his cigarette, "writing purple passages . . ."

"At dawn with the sparrows chirping," she said, pulling the plate
of fruit towards her.  She began peeling a banana, as if she were
unsheathing some soft glove.  He took an apple and peeled it.  The
curl of apple-skin lay on his plate, coiled up like a snake's skin,
he thought; and the banana-skin was like the finger of a glove that
had been ripped open.

The street was now quiet.  The woman had stopped singing.  The
trombone-player had moved off.  The rush hour was over and nothing
went down the street.  He looked at her, biting little bits off her
banana.

When she came to the fourth of June, he remembered, she wore her
skirt the wrong way round.  She was crooked in those days too; and
they had laughed at her--he and Peggy.  She had never married; he
wondered why not.  He swept up the broken coils of apple-peel on
his plate.

"What does he do," he said suddenly, "--that man who throws his
hands out?"

"Like this?" she said.  She threw her hands out.

"Yes," he nodded.  That was the man--one of those voluble
foreigners with a theory about everything.  Yet he had liked him--
he gave off an aroma; a whirr; his flexible supple face worked
amusingly; he had a round forehead; good eyes; and was bald.

"What does he do?" he repeated.

"Talks," she replied, "about the soul."  She smiled.  Again he felt
an outsider; so many talks there must have been between them; such
intimacy.

"About the soul," she continued, taking a cigarette.  "Lectures,"
she added, lighting it.  "Ten and six for a seat in the front row,"
she puffed her smoke out.  "There's standing room at half a crown;
but then," she puffed, "you don't hear so well.  You only catch
half the lesson of the Teacher, the Master," she laughed.

She was sneering at him now; she conveyed the impression that he
was a charlatan.  Yet Peggy had said that they were very intimate--
she and this foreigner.  The vision of the man at Eleanor's changed
slightly like an air ball blown aside.

"I thought he was a friend of yours," he said aloud.

"Nicholas?" she exclaimed.  "I love him!"

Her eyes certainly glowed.  They fixed themselves upon a salt
cellar with a look of rapture that made North feel once more
puzzled.

"You love him. . ." he began.  But here the telephone rang.

"There he is!" she exclaimed.  "That's him!  That's Nicholas!"

She spoke with extreme irritation.

The telephone rang again.  "I'm not here!" she said.  The telephone
rang again.  "Not here!  Not here!  Not here!" she repeated in time
to the bell.  She made no attempt to answer it.  He could stand the
stab of her voice and the bell no longer.  He went over to the
telephone.  There was a pause as he stood with the receiver in his
hand.

"Tell him I'm not here!" she said.

"Hullo," he said, answering the telephone.  But there was a pause.
He looked at her sitting on the edge of her chair, swinging her
foot up and down.  Then a voice spoke.

"I'm North," he answered the telephone.  "I'm dining with Sara. . . .
Yes, I'll tell her. . . ."  He looked at her again.  "She is
sitting on the edge of her chair," he said, "with a smudge on her
face, swinging her foot up and down."



Eleanor stood holding the telephone.  She smiled, and for a moment
after she had put the receiver back stood there, still smiling,
before she turned to her niece Peggy who had been dining with her.

"North is dining with Sara," she said, smiling at the little
telephone picture of two people at the other end of London, one of
whom was sitting on the edge of her chair with a smudge on her
face.

"He's dining with Sara," she said again.  But her niece did not
smile, for she had not seen the picture, and she was slightly
irritated because, in the middle of what they were saying, Eleanor
suddenly got up and said, "I'll just remind Sara."

"Oh, is he?" she said casually.

Eleanor came and sat down.

"We were saying--" she began.

"You've had it cleaned," said Peggy simultaneously.  While Eleanor
telephoned, she had been looking at the picture of her grandmother
over the writing-table.

"Yes," Eleanor glanced back over her shoulder.  "Yes.  And do you
see there's a flower fallen on the grass?" she said.  She turned
and looked at the picture.  The face, the dress, the basket of
flowers all shone softly melting into each other, as if the paint
were one smooth coat of enamel.  There was a flower--a little sprig
of blue--lying in the grass.

"It was hidden by the dirt," said Eleanor.  "But I can just
remember it, when I was a child.  That reminds me, if you want a
good man to clean pictures--"

"But was it like her?" Peggy interrupted.

Somebody had told her that she was like her grandmother: and she
did not want to be like her.  She wanted to be dark and aquiline:
but in fact she was blue-eyed and round-faced--like her
grandmother.

"I've got the address somewhere," Eleanor went on.

"Don't bother--don't bother," said Peggy, irritated by her aunt's
habit of adding unnecessary details.  It was age coming on, she
supposed: age that loosened screws and made the whole apparatus of
the mind rattle and jingle.

"Was it like her?" she asked again.

"Not as I remember her," said Eleanor, glancing once more at the
picture.  "When I was a child perhaps--no, I don't think even as a
child.  What's so interesting," she continued, "is that what they
thought ugly--red hair for instance--we think pretty; so that I
often ask myself," she paused, puffing at her cheroot, "'What is
pretty?'"

"Yes," said Peggy.  "That's what we were saying."

For when Eleanor suddenly took it into her head that she must
remind Sara of the party, they had been talking about Eleanor's
childhood--how things had changed; one thing seemed good to one
generation, another to another.  She liked getting Eleanor to talk
about her past; it seemed to her so peaceful and so safe.

"Is there any standard, d'you think?" she said, wishing to bring
her back to what they were saying.

"I wonder," said Eleanor absentmindedly.  She was thinking of
something else.

"How annoying!" she exclaimed suddenly.  "I had it on the tip of my
tongue--something I want to ask you.  Then I thought of Delia's
party: then North made me laugh--Sally sitting on the edge of her
chair with a smudge on her nose; and that's put it out of my head."
She shook her head.

"D'you know the feeling when one's been on the point of saying
something, and been interrupted; how it seems to stick HERE," she
tapped her forehead, "so that it stops everything else?  Not that
it was anything of importance," she added.  She wandered about the
room for a moment.  "No, I give it up; I give it up," she said,
shaking her head.

"I shall go and get ready now, if you'll call a cab."

She went into the bedroom.  Soon there was the sound of running
water.

Peggy lit another cigarette.  If Eleanor were going to wash, as
seemed likely from the sounds in the bedroom, there was no need to
hurry about the cab.  She glanced at the letters on the
mantelpiece.  An address stuck out on the top of one of them--"Mon
Repos, Wimbledon."  One of Eleanor's dentists, Peggy thought to
herself.  The man she went botanising with on Wimbledon Common
perhaps.  A charming man.  Eleanor had described him.  "He says
every tooth is quite unlike every other tooth.  And he knows all
about plants. . . ."  It was difficult to get her to stick to her
childhood.

She crossed to the telephone; she gave the number.  There was a
pause.  As she waited she looked at her hands holding the
telephone.  Efficient, shell-like, polished but not painted,
they're a compromise, she thought, looking at her finger-nails,
between science and . . .  But here a voice said "Number, please,"
and she gave it.

Again she waited.  As she sat where Eleanor had sat she saw the
telephone picture that Eleanor had seen--Sally sitting on the edge
of her chair with a smudge on her face.  What a fool, she thought
bitterly, and a thrill ran down her thigh.  Why was she bitter?
For she prided herself upon being honest--she was a doctor--and
that thrill she knew meant bitterness.  Did she envy her because
she was happy, or was it the croak of some ancestral prudery--did
she disapprove of these friendships with men who did not love
women?  She looked at the picture of her grandmother as if to ask
her opinion.  But she had assumed the immunity of a work of art;
she seemed as she sat there, smiling at her roses, to be
indifferent to our right and wrong.

"Hullo," said a gruff voice, which suggested sawdust and a shelter,
and she gave the address and put down the telephone just as Eleanor
came in--she was wearing a red-gold Arab cloak with a silver veil
over her hair.

"One of these days d'you think you'll be able to see things at the
end of the telephone?" Peggy said, getting up.  Eleanor's hair was
her beauty, she thought; and her silver-washed dark eyes--a fine
old prophetess, a queer old bird, venerable and funny at one and
the same time.  She was burnt from her travels so that her hair
looked whiter than ever.

"What's that?" said Eleanor, for she had not caught her remark
about the telephone.  Peggy did not repeat it.  They stood at the
window waiting for the cab.  They stood there side by side, silent,
looking out, because there was a pause to fill up, and the view
from the window, which was so high over the roofs, over the squares
and angles of back gardens to the blue line of hills in the
distance served, like another voice speaking, to fill up the pause.
The sun was setting; one cloud lay curled like a red feather in the
blue.  She looked down.  It was queer to see cabs turning corners,
going round this street and down the other, and not to hear the
sound they made.  It was like a map of London; a section laid
beneath them.  The summer day was fading; lights were being lit,
primrose lights, still separate, for the glow of the sunset was
still in the air.  Eleanor pointed at the sky.

"That's where I saw my first aeroplane--there between those
chimneys," she said.  There were high chimneys, factory chimneys,
in the distance; and a great building--Westminster Cathedral was
it?--over there riding above the roofs.

"I was standing here, looking out," Eleanor went on.  "It must have
been just after I'd got into the flat, a summer's day, and I saw a
black spot in the sky, and I said to whoever it was--Miriam
Parrish, I think, yes, for she came to help me to get into the
flat--I hope Delia, by the way, remembered to ask her--" . . .
that's old age, Peggy noted, bringing in one thing after another.

"You said to Miriam--" she prompted her.

"I said to Miriam, 'Is it a bird?  No, I don't think it can be a
bird.  It's too big.  Yet it moves.'  And suddenly it came over me,
that's an aeroplane!  And it was!  You know they'd flown the
Channel not so very long before.  I was staying with you in Dorset
at the time: and I remember reading it out in the paper, and
someone--your father, I think--said:  'The world will never be the
same again!"

"Oh, well--" Peggy laughed.  She was about to say that aeroplanes
hadn't made all that difference, for it was her line to disabuse
her elders of their belief in science, partly because their
credulity amused her, partly because she was daily impressed by the
ignorance of doctors--when Eleanor sighed.

"Oh dear," she murmured.

She turned away from the window.

Old age again, Peggy thought.  Some gust blew open a door: one of
the many millions in Eleanor's seventy-odd years; out came a
painful thought; which she at once concealed--she had gone to her
writing-table and was fidgeting with papers--with the humble
generosity, the painful humility of the old.

"What, Nell--?" Peggy began.

"Nothing, nothing," said Eleanor.  She had seen the sky; and that
sky was laid with pictures--she had seen it so often; any one of
which might come uppermost when she looked at it.  Now, because she
had been talking to North, it brought back the war; how she had
stood there one night, watching the searchlights.  She had come
home, after a raid; she had been dining in Westminster with Renny
and Maggie.  They had sat in a cellar; and Nicholas--it was the
first time she had met him--had said that the war was of no
importance.  "We are children playing with fireworks in the back
garden" . . . she remembered his phrase; and how, sitting round a
wooden packing-case, they had drunk to a new world.  "A new world--
a new world!" Sally had cried, drumming with her spoon on top of
the packing-case.  She turned to her writing-table, tore up a
letter and threw it away.

"Yes," she said, fumbling among her papers, looking for something.
"Yes--I don't know about aeroplanes, I've never been up in one; but
motor cars--I could do without motor cars.  I was almost knocked
down by one, did I tell you?  In the Brompton Road.  All my own
fault--I wasn't looking. . . .  And wireless--that's a nuisance--
the people downstairs turn it on after breakfast; but on the other
hand--hot water; electric light; and those new--"  She paused.
"Ah, there it is!" she exclaimed.  She pounced upon some paper that
she had been hunting for.  "If Edward's there tonight, do remind
me--I'll tie a knot in my handkerchief. . . ."

She opened her bag, took out a silk handkerchief, and proceeded
solemnly to tie it into a knot . . . "to ask him about Runcorn's
boy."

The bell rang.

"The taxi," she said.

She glanced about to make sure that she had forgotten nothing.  She
stopped suddenly.  Her eye had been caught by the evening paper,
which lay on the floor with its broad bar of print and its blurred
photograph.  She picked it up.

"What a face!" she exclaimed, flattening it out on the table.

As far as Peggy could see, but she was short-sighted, it was the
usual evening paper's blurred picture of a fat man gesticulating.

"Damned--" Eleanor shot out suddenly, "bully!"  She tore the paper
across with one sweep of her hand and flung it on the floor.  Peggy
was shocked.  A little shiver ran over her skin as the paper tore.
The word "damned" on her aunt's lips had shocked her.

Next moment she was amused; but still she had been shocked.  For
when Eleanor, who used English so reticently, said "damned" and
then "bully," it meant much more than the words she and her friends
used.  And her gesture, tearing the paper . . .  What a queer set
they are, she thought, as she followed Eleanor down the stairs.
Her red-gold cloak trailed from step to step.  So she had seen her
father crumple The Times and sit trembling with rage because
somebody had said something in a newspaper.  How odd!

And the way she tore it! she thought, half laughing, and she flung
out her hand as Eleanor had flung hers.  Eleanor's figure still
seemed erect with indignation.  It would be simple, she thought, it
would be satisfactory, she thought, following her down flight after
flight of stone steps, to be like that.  The little knob on her
cloak tapped on the stairs.  They descended rather slowly.

"Take my aunt," she said to herself, beginning to arrange the scene
into an argument she had been having with a man at the hospital,
"take my aunt, living alone in a sort of workman's flat at the top
of six flights of stairs . . ."  Eleanor stopped.

"Don't tell me," she said, "that I left the letter upstairs--
Runcorn's letter that I want to show Edward, about the boy?"  She
opened her bag.  "No: here it is."  There it was in her bag.  They
went on downstairs.

Eleanor gave the address to the cabman and sat down with a jerk in
her corner.  Peggy glanced at her out of the corner of her eye.

It was the force that she had put into the words that impressed
her, not the words.  It was as if she still believed with
passion--she, old Eleanor--in the things that man had destroyed.
A wonderful generation, she thought, as they drove off.
Believers . . .

"You see," Eleanor interrupted, as if she wanted to explain her
words, "it means the end of everything we cared for."

"Freedom?" said Peggy perfunctorily.

"Yes," said Eleanor.  "Freedom and justice."

The cab drove off down the mild respectable little streets where
every house had its bow window, its strip of garden, its private
name.  As they drove on, into the big main street, the scene in the
flat composed itself in Peggy's mind as she would tell it to the
man in the hospital.  "Suddenly she lost her temper," she said,
"took the paper and tore it across--my aunt, who's over seventy."
She glanced at Eleanor to verify the details.  Her aunt interrupted
her.

"That's where we used to live," she said.  She waved her hand
towards a long lamp-starred street on the left.  Peggy, looking
out, could just see the imposing unbroken avenue with its
succession of pale pillars and steps.  The repeated columns, the
orderly architecture, had even a pale pompous beauty as one stucco
column repeated another stucco column all down the street.

"Abercorn Terrace," said Eleanor; ". . . the pillar-box," she
murmured as they drove past.  Why the pillar-box? Peggy asked
herself.  Another door had been opened.  Old age must have endless
avenues, stretching away and away down its darkness, she supposed,
and now one door opened and then another.

"Aren't people--" Eleanor began.  Then she stopped.  As usual, she
had begun in the wrong place.

"Yes?" said Peggy.  She was irritated by this inconsequence.

"I was going to say--the pillar-box made me think," Eleanor began;
then she laughed.  She gave up the attempt to account for the order
in which her thoughts came to her.  There was an order, doubtless;
but it took so long to find it, and this rambling, she knew,
annoyed Peggy, for young people's minds worked so quickly.

"That's where we used to dine," she broke off, nodding at a big
house at the corner of a square.  "Your father and I.  The man he
used to read with.  What was his name?  He became a Judge. . . .
We used to dine there, the three of us.  Morris, my father and
I. . . .  They had very large parties in those days.  Always legal
people.  And he collected old oak.  Mostly shams," she added with a
little chuckle.

"You used to dine . . ." Peggy began.  She wished to get her back
to her past.  It was so interesting; so safe; so unreal--that past
of the 'eighties; and to her, so beautiful in its unreality.

"Tell me about your youth . . ." she began.

"But your lives are much more interesting than ours were," said
Eleanor.  Peggy was silent.

They were driving along a bright crowded street; here stained ruby
with the light from picture palaces; here yellow from shop windows
gay with summer dresses, for the shops, though shut, were still lit
up, and people were still looking at dresses, at flights of hats on
little rods, at jewels.

When my Aunt Delia comes to town, Peggy continued the story of
Eleanor that she was telling her friend at the hospital, she says,
We must have a party.  Then they all flock together.  They love it.
As for herself, she hated it.  She would far rather have stayed at
home or gone to the pictures.  It's the sense of the family, she
added, glancing at Eleanor as if to collect another little fact
about her to add to her portrait of a Victorian spinster.  Eleanor
was looking out of the window.  Then she turned.

"And the experiment with the guinea-pig--how did that go off?" she
asked.  Peggy was puzzled.

Then she remembered and told her.

"I see.  So it proved nothing.  So you've got to begin all over
again.  That's very interesting.  Now I wish you'd explain to
me . . ."  There was another problem that puzzled her.

The things she wants explained, Peggy said to her friend at the
Hospital, are either as simple as two and two make four, or so
difficult that nobody in the world knows the answer.  And if you
say to her, "What's eight times eight?"--she smiled at the profile
of her aunt against the window--she taps her forehead and says . . .
but again Eleanor interrupted her.

"It's so good of you to come," she said, giving her a little pat on
the knee.  (But did I show her, Peggy thought, that I hate coming?)

"It's a way of seeing people," Eleanor continued.  "And now that
we're all getting on--not you, us--one doesn't like to miss
chances."

They drove on.  And how does one get THAT right? Peggy thought,
trying to add another touch to the portrait.  "Sentimental" was
it? Or, on the contrary, was it good to feel like that . . .
natural . . . right?  She shook her head.  I'm no use at describing
people, she said to her friend at the Hospital.  They're too
difficult. . . .  She's not like that--not like that at all, she
said, making a little dash with her hand as if to rub out an outline
that she had drawn wrongly.  As she did so, her friend at the
Hospital vanished.

She was alone with Eleanor in the cab.  And they were passing
houses.  Where does she begin, and where do I end? she thought. . . .
On they drove.  They were two living people, driving across
London; two sparks of life enclosed in two separate bodies; and
those sparks of life enclosed in two separate bodies are at this
moment, she thought, driving past a picture palace.  But what is
this moment; and what are we?  The puzzle was too difficult for her
to solve it.  She sighed.

"You're too young to feel that," said Eleanor.

"What?" Peggy asked with a little start.

"About meeting people.  About not missing chances of seeing them."

"Young?" said Peggy.  "I shall never be as young as you are!"
She patted her Aunt's knee in her turn.  "Gallivanting off to
India . . ." she laughed.

"Oh, India.  India's nothing nowadays," said Eleanor.  "Travel's so
easy.  You just take a ticket; just get on board ship. . . .  But
what I want to see before I die," she continued, "is something
different. . . ."  She waved her hand out of the window.  They were
passing public buildings; offices of some sort.  ". . . another
kind of civilisation.  Tibet, for instance.  I was reading a book
by a man called--now what was he called?"

She paused, distracted by the sights in the street.  "Don't people
wear pretty clothes nowadays?" she said, pointing to a girl with
fair hair and a young man in evening dress.

"Yes," said Peggy perfunctorily, looking at the painted face and
the bright shawl; at the white waistcoat and the smoothed back
hair.  Anything distracts Eleanor, everything interests her, she
thought.

"Was it that you were suppressed when you were young?" she said
aloud, recalling vaguely some childish memory; her grandfather with
the shiny stumps instead of fingers; and a long dark drawing-room.
Eleanor turned.  She was surprised.

"Suppressed?" she repeated.  She so seldom thought about herself
now that she was surprised.

"Oh, I see what you mean," she added after a moment.  A picture--
another picture--had swum to the surface.  There was Delia standing
in the middle of the room; Oh my God!  Oh my God! she was saying; a
hansom cab had stopped at the house next door; and she herself was
watching Morris--was it Morris?--going down the street to post a
letter. . . .  She was silent.  I do not want to go back into my
past, she was thinking.  I want the present.

"Where's he taking us?" she said, looking out.  They had reached
the public part of London; the illuminated.  The light fell on
broad pavements; on white brilliantly lit-up public offices; on a
pallid, hoary-looking church.  Advertisements popped in and out.
Here was a bottle of beer: it poured: then stopped: then poured
again.  They had reached the theatre quarter.  There was the usual
garish confusion.  Men and women in evening dress were walking in
the middle of the road.  Cabs were wheeling and stopping.  Their
own taxi was held up.  It stopped dead under a statue: the lights
shone on its cadaverous pallor.

"Always reminds me of an advertisement of sanitary towels," said
Peggy, glancing at the figure of a woman in nurse's uniform holding
out her hand.

Eleanor was shocked for a moment.  A knife seemed to slice her
skin, leaving a ripple of unpleasant sensation; but what was solid
in her body it did not touch, she realised after a moment.  That
she said because of Charles, she thought, feeling the bitterness in
her tone--her brother, a nice dull boy who had been killed.

"The only fine thing that was said in the war," she said aloud,
reading the words cut on the pedestal.

"It didn't come to much," said Peggy sharply.

The cab remained fixed in the block.

The pause seemed to hold them in the light of some thought that
they both wished to put away.

"Don't people wear pretty clothes nowadays?" said Eleanor, pointing
to another girl with fair hair in a long bright cloak and another
young man in evening dress.

"Yes," said Peggy briefly.

But why don't you enjoy yourself more? Eleanor said to herself.
Her brother's death had been very sad, but she had always found
North much the more interesting of the two.  The cab threaded its
way through the traffic and passed into a back street.  He was
stopped now by a red light.  "It's nice, having North back again,"
Eleanor said.

"Yes," said Peggy.  "He says we talk of nothing but money and
politics," she added.  She finds fault with him because he was not
the one to be killed; but that's wrong, Eleanor thought.

"Does he?" she said.  "But then . . ."  A newspaper placard, with
large black letters, seemed to finish her sentence for her.  They
were approaching the square in which Delia lived.  She began to
fumble with her purse.  She looked at the metre which had mounted
rather high.  The man was going the long way round.

"He'll find his way in time," she said.  They were gliding slowly
round the square.  She waited patiently, holding her purse in her
hand.  She saw a breadth of dark sky over the roofs.  The sun had
sunk.  For a moment the sky had the quiet look of the sky that lies
above fields and woods in the country.

"He'll have to turn, that's all," she said.  "I'm not despondent,"
she added, as the taxi turned.  "Travelling, you see: when one has
to mix up with all sorts of other people on board ship, or in one
of those little places where one has to stay--off the beaten track--"
The taxi was sliding tentatively past house after house--"You
ought to go there, Peggy," she broke off; "you ought to travel:
the natives are so beautiful you know; half naked: going down to
the river in the moonlight;--that's the house over there--"  She
tapped on the window--the taxi slowed down.  "What was I saying?
I'm not despondent, no, because people are so kind, so good at
heart. . . . So that if only ordinary people, ordinary people like
ourselves . . ."

The cab drew up at a house whose windows were lit up.  Peggy leant
forward and opened the door.  She jumped out and paid the driver.
Eleanor bundled out after her.  "No, no, no, Peggy," she began.

"It's my cab.  It's my cab," Peggy protested.

"But I insist on paying my share," said Eleanor, opening her purse.



"That's Eleanor," said North.  He left the telephone and turned to
Sara.  She was still swinging her foot up and down.

"She told me to tell you to come to Delia's party," he said.

"To Delia's party?  Why to Delia's party?" she asked.

"Because they're old and want you to come," he said, standing over
her.

"Old Eleanor; wandering Eleanor; Eleanor with the wild eyes . . ."
she mused.  "Shall I, shan't I, shall I, shan't I?" she hummed,
looking up at him.  "No," she said, putting her feet to the ground,
"I shan't."

"You must," he said.  For her manner irritated him--Eleanor's voice
was still in his ears.

"I must, must I?" she said, making the coffee.

"Then," she said, giving him his cup and picking up the book at the
same time, "read until we must go."

She curled herself up again, holding her cup in her hand.

It was still early, it was true.  But why, he thought as he opened
the book again and turned over the pages, won't she come?  Is she
afraid? he wondered.  He looked at her crumpled in her chair.  Her
dress was shabby.  He looked at the book again, but he could hardly
see to read.  She had not lit the lamp.

"I can't see to read without a light," he said.  It grew dark soon
in this street; the houses were so close.  Now a car passed and a
light slid across the ceiling.

"Shall I turn on the light?" she asked.

"No," he said.  "I'll try to remember something."  He began to say
aloud the only poem he knew by heart.  As he spoke the words out
into the semi-darkness they sounded extremely beautiful, he
thought, because they could not see each other, perhaps.

He paused at the end of the verse.

"Go on," she said.

He began again.  The words going out into the room seemed like
actual presences, hard and independent; yet as she was listening
they were changed by their contact with her.  But as he reached the
end of the second verse--


     Society is all but rude--
     To this delicious solitude . . .


he heard a sound.  Was it in the poem or outside of it, he
wondered?  Inside, he thought, and was about to go on, when she
raised her hand.  He stopped.  He heard heavy footsteps outside the
door.  Was someone coming in?  Her eyes were on the door.

"The Jew," she murmured.

"The Jew?" he said.  They listened.  He could hear quite distinctly
now.  Somebody was turning on taps; somebody was having a bath in
the room opposite.

"The Jew having a bath," she said.

"The Jew having a bath?" he repeated.

"And tomorrow there'll be a line of grease round the bath," she
said.

"Damn the Jew!" he exclaimed.  The thought of a line of grease from
a strange man's body on the bath next door disgusted him.

"Go on--" said Sara:  "Society is all but rude," she repeated the
last lines, "to this delicious solitude."

"No," he said.

They listened to the water running.  The man was coughing and
clearing his throat as he sponged.

"Who is this Jew?" he asked.

"Abrahamson, in the tallow trade," she said.

They listened.

"Engaged to a pretty girl in a tailor's shop," she added.

They could hear the sounds through the thin walls very distinctly.

He was snorting as he sponged himself.

"But he leaves hairs in the bath," she concluded.

North felt a shiver run through him.  Hairs in food, hairs on
basins, other people's hairs made him feel physically sick.

"D'you share a bath with him?" he asked.

She nodded.

He made a noise like "Pah!"

"'Pah.'  That's what I said," she laughed.  "'Pah!'--when I went
into the bathroom on a cold winter's morning--'Pah!'--she threw her
hand out--"'Pah!'" She paused.

"And then--?" he asked.

"And then," she said, sipping her coffee, "I came back into the
sitting-room.  And breakfast was waiting.  Fried eggs and a bit of
toast.  Lydia with her blouse torn and her hair down.  The
unemployed singing hymns under the window.  And I said to myself--"
she flung her hand out, "'Polluted city, unbelieving city, city of
dead fish and worn-out frying-pans'--thinking of a river's bank,
when the tide's out," she explained.

"Go on," he nodded.

"So I put on my hat and coat and rushed out in a rage," she
continued, "and stood on the bridge, and said, 'Am I a weed,
carried this way, that way, on a tide that comes twice a day
without a meaning?'"

"Yes?" he prompted her.

"And there were people passing; the strutting; the tiptoeing; the
pasty; the ferret-eyed; the bowler-hatted, servile innumerable army
of workers.  And I said, 'Must I join your conspiracy?  Stain the
hand, the unstained hand,'"--he could see her hand gleam as she
waved it in the half-light of the sitting-room, "'--and sign on,
and serve a master; all because of a Jew in my bath, all because of
a Jew?'"

She sat up and laughed, excited by the sound of her own voice which
had run in to a jog-trot rhythm.

"Go on, go on," he said.

"But I had a talisman, a glowing gem, a lucent emerald"--she picked
up an envelope that lay on the floor--"a letter of introduction.
And I said to the flunkey in peach-blossom trousers, 'Admit me,
sirrah,' and he led me along corridors piled with purple till I
came to a door, a mahogany door, and knocked; and a voice said,
'Enter.'  And what did I find?"  She paused.  "A stout man with red
cheeks.  On his table three orchids in a vase.  Pressed into your
hand, I thought, as the car crunches the gravel by your wife at
parting.  And over the fireplace the usual picture--"

"Stop!"  North interrupted her.  "You have come to an office," he
tapped the table.  "You are presenting a letter of introduction--
but to whom?"

"Oh, to whom?" she laughed.  "To a man in sponge-bag trousers.  'I
knew your father at Oxford,' he said, toying with the blotting-
paper, ornamented in one corner with a cartwheel.  But what do YOU
find insoluble, I asked him, looking at the mahogany man, the
clean-shaven, rosy-gilled, mutton-fed man--"

"The man in a newspaper office," North checked her, "who knew your
father.  And then?"

"There was a humming and a grinding.  The great machines went
round; and little boys popped in with elongated sheets; black
sheets; smudged; damp with printer's ink.  'Pardon me a moment,' he
said, and made a note in the margin.  But the Jew's in my bath, I
said--the Jew . . . the Jew--"  She stopped suddenly and emptied
her glass.

Yes, he thought, there's the voice; there's the attitude; and the
reflection in other people's faces; but then there's something
true--in the silence perhaps.  But it was not silent.  They could
hear the Jew thudding in the bathroom; he seemed to stagger from
foot to foot as he dried himself.  Now he unlocked the door, and
they heard him go upstairs.  The pipes began to give forth hollow
gurgling sounds.

"How much of that was true?" he asked her.  But she had lapsed into
silence.  The actual words he supposed--the actual words floated
together and formed a sentence in his mind--meant that she was
poor; that she must earn her living, but the excitement with which
she had spoken, due to wine perhaps, had created yet another
person; another semblance, which one must solidify into one whole.

The house was quiet now, save for the sound of the bath water
running away.  A watery pattern fluctuated on the ceiling.  The
street lamps jiggering up and down outside made the houses opposite
a curious pale red.  The uproar of the day had died away; no carts
were rattling down the street.  The vegetable-sellers, the organ-
grinders, the woman practising her scales, the man playing the
trombone, had all trundled away their barrows, pulled down their
shutters, and closed the lids of their pianos.  It was so still
that for a moment North thought he was in Africa, sitting on the
verandah in the moonlight; but he roused himself.  "What about this
party?" he said.  He got up and threw away his cigarette.  He
stretched himself and looked at his watch.  "It's time to go," he
said.  "Go and get ready," he urged her.  For if one went to a
party, he thought, it was absurd to go just as people were leaving.
And the party must have begun.



"What were you saying--what were you saying, Nell?" said Peggy, in
order to distract Eleanor from paying her share of the cab, as they
stood on the doorstep.  "Ordinary people--ordinary people ought to
do what?" she asked.

Eleanor was still fumbling with her purse and did not answer.

"No, I can't allow that," she said.  "Here, take this--"

But Peggy brushed aside the hand, and the coins rolled on the
doorstep.  They both stooped simultaneously and their heads
collided.

"Don't bother," said Eleanor as a coin rolled away.  "It was all my
fault."  The maid was holding the door open.

"And where do we take our cloaks off?" she said.  "In here?"

They went into a room on the ground floor which, though an office,
had been arranged so that it could be used as a cloak-room.  There
was a looking-glass on the table: and in front of it trays of pins
and combs and brushes.  She went up to the glass and gave herself
one brief glance.

"What a gipsy I look!" she said, and ran a comb through her hair.
"Burnt as brown as a nigger!"  Then she gave way to Peggy and
waited.

"I wonder if this was the room . . ." she said.

"What room?" said Peggy abstractedly: she was attending to her
face.

". . . where we used to meet," said Eleanor.  She looked about her.
It was still used as an office apparently; but now there were
house-agents' placards on the wall.

"I wonder if Kitty'll come tonight," she mused.

Peggy was gazing into the glass and did not answer.

"She doesn't often come to town now.  Only for weddings and
christenings and so on," Eleanor continued.

Peggy was drawing a line with a tube of some sort round her lips.

"Suddenly you meet a young man six-foot-two and you realise this is
the baby," Eleanor went on.

Peggy was still absorbed in her face.

"D'you have to do that fresh every time?" said Eleanor.

"I should look a fright if I didn't," said Peggy.  The tightness
round her lips and eyes seemed to her visible.  She had never felt
less in the mood for a party.

"Oh, how kind of you . . ."  Eleanor broke off.  The maid had
brought in a sixpence.

"Now, Peggy," said she, proffering the coin, "let me pay my share."

"Don't be an ass," said Peggy, brushing away her hand.

"But it was my cab," Eleanor insisted.  Peggy walked on.  "Because
I hate going to parties," Eleanor continued, following her, still
holding out the coin, "on the cheap.  You don't remember your
grandfather?  He always said, 'Don't spoil a good ship for a
ha'porth of tar.'  If you went shopping with him," she went on as
they began mounting the stairs, "'Show me the very best thing
you've got,' he'd say."

"I remember him," said Peggy.

"Do you?" said Eleanor.  She was pleased that anyone should
remember her father.  "They've lent these rooms, I suppose," she
added as they walked upstairs.  Doors were open.  "That's a
solicitor's," she said, looking at some deed-boxes with white names
painted on them.

"Yes, I see what you mean about painting--making-up," she
continued, glancing at her niece.  "You do look nice.  You look
lit-up.  I like it on young people.  Not for myself.  I should feel
bedizened--bedizzened?--how d'you pronounce it?  And what am I to
do with these coppers if you won't take them?  I ought to have left
them in my bag downstairs."  They mounted higher and higher.  "I
suppose they've opened all these rooms," she continued--they had
now reached a strip of red carpet--"so that if Delia's little room
gets too full--but of course the party's hardly begun yet.  We're
early.  Everybody's upstairs.  I hear them talking.  Come along.
Shall I go first?"

A babble of voices sounded behind a door.  A maid intercepted them.

"Miss Pargiter," said Eleanor.

"Miss Pargiter!" the maid called out, opening the door.



"Go and get ready," said North.  He crossed the room and fumbled
with the switch.

He touched the switch, and the electric light in the middle of the
room came on.  The shade had been taken off, and a cone of greenish
paper had been twisted round it.

"Go and get ready," he repeated.  Sara did not answer.  She had
pulled a book towards her and pretended to read it.

"He's killed the king," she said.  "So what'll he do next?"  She
held her finger between the pages of the book and looked up at him;
a device, he knew, to put off the moment of action.  He did not
want to go either.  Still, if Eleanor wanted them to go--he
hesitated, looking at his watch.

"What'll he do next?" she repeated.

"Comedy," he said briefly, "Contrast," he said, remembering
something he had read.  "The only form of continuity," he added at
a venture.

"Well, go on reading," she said, handing him the book.

He opened it at random.

"The scene is a rocky island in the middle of the sea," he said.
He paused.

Always before reading he had to arrange the scene; to let this
sink; that come forward.  A rocky island in the middle of the sea,
he said to himself--there were green pools, tufts of silver grass,
sand, and far away the soft sigh of waves breaking.  He opened his
mouth to read.  Then there was a sound behind him; a presence--in
the play or in the room?  He looked up.

"Maggie!" Sara exclaimed.  There she was standing at the open door
in evening dress.



"Were you asleep?" she said, coming into the room.  "We've been
ringing and ringing."

She stood smiling at them, amused, as if she had wakened sleepers.

"Why d'you trouble to have a bell when it's always broken?" said a
man who stood behind her.

North rose.  At first he scarcely remembered them.  The surface
sight was strange on top of his memory of them, as he had seen them
years ago.

"The bells don't ring, and the taps don't run," he said, awkwardly.
"Or they don't stop running," he added, for the bath water was
still gurgling in the pipes.

"Luckily the door was open," said Maggie.  She stood at the table
looking at the broken apple peel and the dish of fly-blown fruit.
Some beauty, North thought, withers; some, he looked at her, grows
more beautiful with age.  Her hair was grey; her children must be
grown up now, he supposed.  But why do women purse their lips up
when they look in the glass? he wondered.  She was looking in the
glass.  She was pursing her lips.  Then she crossed the room, and
sat down in the chair by the fireplace.

"And why has Renny been crying?" said Sara.  North looked at him.
There were wet marks on either side of his large nose.

"Because we've been to a very bad play," he said, "and should like
something to drink," he added.

Sara went to the cupboard and began clinking glasses.  "Were you
reading?" said Renny, looking at the book which had fallen on the
floor.

"We were on a rocky island in the middle of the sea," said Sara,
putting the glasses on the table.  Renny began to pour out whisky.

Now I remember him, North thought.  Last time they had met was
before he went to the war.  It was in a little house in
Westminster.  They had sat in front of the fire.  And a child had
played with a spotted horse.  And he had envied them their
happiness.  And they had talked about science.  And Renny had said,
"I help them to make shells," and a mask had come down over his
face.  A man who made shells; a man who loved peace; a man of
science; a man who cried. . . .

"Stop!" cried Renny.  "Stop!"  Sara had spurted the soda water over
the table.

"When did you get back?" Renny asked him, taking his glass and
looking at him with eyes still wet with tears.

"About a week ago," he said.

"You've sold your farm?" said Renny.  He sat down with his glass in
his hand.

"Yes, sold it," said North.  "Whether I shall stay, or go back," he
said, taking his glass and raising it to his lips, "I don't know."

"Where was your farm?" said Renny, bending towards him.  And they
talked about Africa.



Maggie looked at them drinking and talking.  The twisted cone of
paper over the electric light was oddly stained.  The mottled light
made their faces look greenish.  The two grooves on each side of
Renny's nose were still wet.  His face was all peaks and hollows;
North's face was round and snub-nosed and rather blueish about the
lips.  She gave her chair a little push so that she got the two
heads in relation side by side.  They were very different.  And as
they talked about Africa their faces changed, as if some twitch had
been given to the fine network under the skin and the weights fell
into different sockets.  A thrill ran through her as if the weights
in her own body had changed too.  But there was something about the
light that puzzled her.  She looked round.  A lamp must be flaring
in the street outside.  Its light, flickering up and down, mixed
with the electric light under the greenish cone of mottled paper.
It was that which. . . .  She started; a voice had reached her.

"To Africa?" she said, looking at North.

"To Delia's party," he said.  "I asked if you were coming. . . ."
She had not been listening.

"One moment . . ." Renny interrupted.  He held up his hand like a
policeman stopping traffic.  And again they went on, talking about
Africa.

Maggie lay back in her chair.  Behind their heads rose the curve of
the mahogany chair back.  And behind the curve of the chair back
was a crinkled glass with a red lip; then there was the straight
line of the mantelpiece with little black-and-white squares on it;
and then three rods ending in soft yellow plumes.  She ran her eye
from thing to thing.  In and out it went, collecting, gathering,
summing up into one whole, when, just as she was about to complete
the pattern, Renny exclaimed:

"We must--we must!"

He had got up.  He had pushed away his glass of whisky.  He stood
there like somebody commanding a troop, North thought; so emphatic
was his voice, so commanding his gesture.  Yet it was only a
question of going round to an old woman's party.  Or was there
always, he thought, as he too rose and looked for his hat,
something that came to the surface, inappropriately, unexpectedly,
from the depths of people, and made ordinary actions, ordinary
words, expressive of the whole being, so that he felt, as he turned
to follow Renny to Delia's party, as if he were riding to the
relief of a besieged garrison across a desert?

He stopped with his hand on the door.  Sara had come in from the
bedroom.  She had changed; she was in evening dress; there was
something odd about her--perhaps it was the effect of the evening
dress estranging her?

"I am ready," she said, looking at them.

She stooped and picked up the book that North had let fall.

"We must go--" she said, turning to her sister.

She put the book on the table; she gave it a sad little pat as she
shut it.

"We must go," she repeated, and followed them down the stairs.

Maggie rose.  She gave one more look at the cheap lodging-house
room.  There was the pampas grass in its terra-cotta pot; the green
vase with the crinkled lip; and the mahogany chair.  On the dinner
table lay the dish of fruit; the heavy sensual apples lay side by
side with the yellow spotted bananas.  It was an odd combination--
the round and the tapering, the rosy and the yellow.  She switched
off the light.  The room now was almost dark, save for a watery
pattern fluctuating on the ceiling.  In this phantom evanescent
light only the outlines showed; ghostly apples, ghostly bananas,
and the spectre of a chair.  Colour was slowly returning, as her
eyes grew used to the darkness, and substance. . . .  She stood
there for a moment looking.  Then a voice shouted:

"Maggie!  Maggie!"

"I'm coming!" she cried, and followed them down the stairs.



"And your name, miss?" said the maid to Peggy as she hung back
behind Eleanor.

"Miss Margaret Pargiter," said Peggy.

"Miss Margaret Pargiter!" the maid called out into the room.

There was a babble of voices; lights opened brightly in front of
her, and Delia came forward.  "Oh, Peggy!" she exclaimed.  "How
nice of you to come!"

She went in; but she felt plated, coated over with some cold skin.
They had come too early--the room was almost empty.  Only a few
people stood about, talking too loudly, as if to fill the room.
Making believe, Peggy thought to herself as she shook hands with
Delia and passed on, that something pleasant is about to happen.
She saw with extreme clearness the Persian rug and the carved
fireplace, but there was an empty space in the middle of the room.

What is the tip for this particular situation? she asked herself,
as if she were prescribing for a patient.  Take notes, she added.
Do them up in a bottle with a glossy green cover, she thought.
Take notes and the pain goes.  Take notes and the pain goes, she
repeated to herself as she stood there alone.  Delia hurried past
her.  She was talking, but talking at random.

"It's all very well for you people who live in London--" she was
saying.  But the nuisance of taking notes of what people say, Peggy
went on as Delia passed her, is that they talk such nonsense . . .
such complete nonsense, she thought, drawing herself back against
the wall.  Here her father came in.  He paused at the door; put his
head up as if he were looking for someone, and advanced with his
hand out.

And what's this? she asked, for the sight of her father in his
rather worn shoes had given her a direct spontaneous feeling.  This
sudden warm spurt? she asked, examining it.  She watched him cross
the room.  His shoes always affected her strangely.  Part sex; part
pity, she thought.  Can one call it "love"?  But she forced herself
to move.  Now that I have drugged myself into a state of
comparative insensibility, she said to herself, I will walk across
the room boldly; I will go to Uncle Patrick, who is standing by the
sofa picking his teeth, and I will say to him--what shall I say?

A sentence suggested itself for no rhyme or reason as she crossed
the room:  "How's the man who cut his toes off with the hatchet?"

"How's the man who cut his toes off with the hatchet?" she said,
speaking the words exactly as she thought them.  The handsome old
Irishman bent down, for he was very tall, and hollowed his hand,
for he was hard of hearing.

"Hacket?  Hacket?" he repeated.  She smiled.  The steps from brain
to brain must be cut very shallow, if thought is to mount them, she
noted.

"Cut his toes off with the hatchet when I was staying with you,"
she said.  She remembered how when she last stayed with them in
Ireland the gardener had cut his foot with a hatchet.

"Hacket?  Hacket?" he repeated.  He looked puzzled.  Then
understanding dawned.

"Oh, the Hackets!" he said.  "Dear old Peter Hacket--yes."  It
seemed that there were Hackets in Galway, and the mistake, which
she did not trouble to explain, was all to the good, for it set him
off, and he told her stories about the Hackets as they sat side by
side on the sofa.

A grown woman, she thought, crosses London to talk to a deaf old
man about the Hackets, whom she's never heard of, when she meant to
ask after the gardener who cut his toe off with a hatchet.  But
does it matter?  Hackets or hatchets?  She laughed, happily in time
with a joke, so that it seemed appropriate.  But one wants somebody
to laugh with, she thought.  Pleasure is increased by sharing it.
Does the same hold good of pain? she mused.  Is that the reason why
we all talk so much of ill-health--because sharing things lessens
things?  Give pain, give pleasure an outer body, and by increasing
the surface diminish them. . . .  But the thought slipped.  He was
off telling his old stories.  Gently, methodically, like a man
setting in motion some still serviceable but rather weary nag, he
was off remembering old days, old dogs, old memories that slowly
shaped themselves, as he warmed, into little figures of country
house life.  She fancied as she half listened that she was looking
at a faded snapshot of cricketers; of shooting parties on the many
steps of some country mansion.

How many people, she wondered, listen?  This "sharing," then, is a
bit of a farce.  She made herself attend.

"Ah yes, those were fine old days!" he was saying.  The light came
into his faded eyes.

She looked once more at the snapshot of the men in gaiters, and the
women in flowing skirts on the broad white steps with the dogs
curled up at their feet.  But he was off again.

"Did you ever hear from your father of a man called Roddy Jenkins
who lived in the little white house on the right-hand side as you
go along the road?" he asked.  "But you must know that story?" he
added.

"No," she said, screwing up her eyes as if she referred to the
files of memory.  "Tell me."

And he told her the story.

I'm good, she thought, at fact-collecting.  But what makes up a
person--, (she hollowed her hand), the circumference,--no, I'm not
good at that.  There was her Aunt Delia.  She watched her moving
quickly about the room.  What do I know about her?  That she's
wearing a dress with gold spots; has wavy hair, that was red, is
white; is handsome; ravaged; with a past.  But what past?  She
married Patrick. . . .  The long story that Patrick was telling her
kept breaking up the surface of her mind like oars dipping into
water.  Nothing could settle.  There was a lake in the story too,
for it was a story about duck-shooting.

She married Patrick, she thought, looking at his battered weather-
worn face with the single hairs on it.  Why did Delia marry
Patrick? she wondered.  How do they manage it--love, childbirth?
The people who touch each other and go up in a cloud of smoke: red
smoke?  His face reminded her of the red skin of a gooseberry with
the little stray hairs.  But none of the lines on his face was
sharp enough, she thought, to explain how they came together and
had three children.  They were lines that came from shooting; lines
that came from worry; for the old days were over, he was saying.
They had to cut things down.

"Yes, we're all finding that," she said perfunctorily.  She turned
her wrist cautiously so that she could read her watch.  Fifteen
minutes only had passed.  But the room was filling with people she
did not know.  There was an Indian in a pink turban.

"Ah, but I'm boring you with these old stories," said her uncle,
wagging his head.  He was hurt, she felt.

"No, no, no!" she said, feeling uncomfortable.  He was off again,
but out of good manners this time, she felt.  Pain must outbalance
pleasure by two parts to one, she thought; in all social relations.
Or am I the exception, the peculiar person? she continued, for the
others seemed happy enough.  Yes, she thought, looking straight
ahead of her, and feeling again the stretched skin round her lips
and eyes tight from the tiredness of sitting up late with a woman
in childbirth, I'm the exception; hard; cold; in a groove already;
merely a doctor.

Getting out of grooves is damned unpleasant, she thought, before
the chill of death has set in, like bending frozen boots. . . .
She bent her head to listen.  To smile, to bend, to make believe
you're amused when you're bored, how painful it is, she thought.
All ways, every way's painful, she thought; staring at the Indian
in the pink turban.

"Who's that fellow?" Patrick asked, nodding his head in his
direction.

"One of Eleanor's Indians I expect," she said aloud, and thought,
If only the merciful powers of darkness would obliterate the
external exposure of the sensitive nerve and I could get up
and. . . .  There was a pause.

"But I mustn't keep you here, listening to my old stories," said
Uncle Patrick.  His weather-beaten nag with the broken knees had
stopped.

"But tell me, does old Biddy still keep the little shop," she
asked, "where we used to buy sweets?"

"Poor old body--" he began.  He was off again.  All her patients
said that, she thought.  Rest--rest--let me rest.  How to deaden;
how to cease to feel; that was the cry of the woman bearing
children; to rest, to cease to be.  In the Middle Ages, she
thought, it was the cell; the monastery; now it's the laboratory;
the professions; not to live; not to feel; to make money, always
money, and in the end, when I'm old and worn like a horse, no, it's
a cow. . .--for part of old Patrick's story had imposed itself upon
her mind: ". . . for there's no sale for the beasts at all," he was
saying, "no sale at all.  Ah, there's Julia Cromarty--" he
exclaimed, and waved his hand, his large loose-jointed hand, at a
charming compatriot.

She was left sitting alone on the sofa.  For her uncle rose and
went off with both hands outstretched to greet the bird-like old
woman who had come in chattering.

She was left alone.  She was glad to be alone.  She had no wish to
talk.  But next moment somebody stood beside her.  It was Martin.
He sat down beside her.  She changed her attitude completely.

"Hullo, Martin!" she greeted him cordially.

"Done your duty by the old mare, Peggy?" he said.  He referred to
the stories that old Patrick always told them.

"Did I look very glum?" she asked.

"Well," he said, glancing at her, "not exactly enraptured."

"One knows the end of his stories by now," she excused herself,
looking at Martin.  He had taken to brushing his hair up like a
waiter's.  He never looked her fully in the face.  He never felt
entirely at his ease with her.  She was his doctor; she knew that
he dreaded cancer.  She must try to distract him from thinking,
Does she see any symptoms?

"I was wondering how they came to marry," she said.  "Were they in
love?"  She spoke at random to distract him.

"Of course he was in love," he said.  He looked at Delia.  She was
standing by the fireplace talking to the Indian.  She was still a
very handsome woman, with her presence, with her gestures.

"We were all in love," he said, glancing sideways at Peggy.  The
younger generation were so serious.

"Oh, of course," she said, smiling.  She liked his eternal pursuit
of one love after another love--his gallant clutch upon the flying
tail, the slippery tail of youth--even he, even now.

"But you," he said, stretching his feet out, hitching up his
trousers, "your generation I mean--you miss a great deal . . . you
miss a great deal," he repeated.  She waited.

"Loving only your own sex," he added.

He liked to assert his own youth in that way, she thought; to say
things that he thought up to date.

"I'm not that generation," she said.

"Well, well, well," he chuckled, shrugging his shoulder and
glancing at her sideways.  He knew very little about her private
life.  But she looked serious; she looked tired.  She works too
hard, he thought.

"I'm getting on," said Peggy.  "Getting into a groove.  So Eleanor
told me tonight."

Or was it she, on the other hand, who had told Eleanor she was
"suppressed"?  One or the other.

"Eleanor's a gay old dog," he said.  "Look!"  He pointed.

There she was, talking to the Indian in her red cloak.

"Just back from India," he added.  "A present from Bengal, eh?" he
said, referring to the cloak.

"And next year she's off to China," said Peggy.

"But Delia--" she asked; Delia was passing them.  "Was she in
love?"  (What you in your generation called "in love," she added to
herself.)

He wagged his head from side to side and pursed his lips.  He
always liked his little joke, she remembered.

"I don't know--I don't know about Delia," he said.  "There was the
cause, you know--what she called in those days The Cause."  He
screwed his face up.  "Ireland, you know.  Parnell.  Ever heard of
a man called Parnell?" he asked.

"Yes," said Peggy.

"And Edward?" she added.  He had come in; he looked very
distinguished, too, in his elaborate, if conscious simplicity.

"Edward--yes," said Martin.  "Edward was in love.  Surely you know
that old story--Edward and Kitty?"

"The one who married--what was his name?--Lasswade?" Peggy murmured
as Edward passed them.

"Yes, she married the other man--Lasswade.  But he was in love--he
was very much in love," Martin murmured.  "But you," he gave her a
quick little glance.  There was something in her that chilled him.
"Of course, you have your profession," he added.  He looked at the
ground.  He was thinking of his dread of cancer, she supposed.  He
was afraid that she had noted some symptom.

"Oh, doctors are great humbugs," she threw out at random.

"Why?  People live longer than they used, don't they?" he said.
"They don't die so painfully anyhow," he added.

"We've learnt a few little tricks," she conceded.  He stared ahead
of him with a look that moved her pity.

"You'll live to be eighty--if you want to live to be eighty," she
said.  He looked at her.

"Of course I'm all in favour of living to be eighty!" he exclaimed.
"I want to go to America.  I want to see their buildings.  I'm on
that side, you see.  I enjoy life."  He did, enormously.

He must be over sixty himself, she supposed.  But he was
wonderfully got up; as sprig and spruce as a man of forty, with his
canary-coloured lady in Kensington.

"I don't know," she said aloud.

"Come, Peggy, come," he said.  "Don't tell me you don't enjoy--
here's Rose."

Rose came up.  She had grown very stout.

"Don't you want to be eighty?" he said to her.  He had to say it
twice over.  She was deaf.

"I do.  Of course I do!" she said when she understood him.  She
faced them.  She made an odd angle with her head thrown back, Peggy
thought, as if she were a military man.

"Of course I do," she said, sitting down abruptly on the sofa
beside them.

"Ah, but then--" Peggy began.  She paused.  Rose was deaf, she
remembered.  She had to shout.  "People hadn't made such fools of
themselves in your day," she shouted.  But she doubted if Rose
heard.

"I want to see what's going to happen," said Rose.  "We live in a
very interesting world," she added.

"Nonsense," Martin teased her.  "You want to live," he bawled in
her ear, "because you enjoy living."

"And I'm not ashamed of it," she said.  "I like my kind--on the
whole."

"What you like is fighting them," he bawled.

"D'you think you can get a rise out of me at this time o' day?" she
said, tapping him on the arm.

Now they'll talk about being children; climbing trees in the back
garden, thought Peggy, and how they shot somebody's cats.  Each
person had a certain line laid down in their minds, she thought,
and along it came the same old sayings.  One's mind must be
crisscrossed like the palm of one's hand, she thought, looking at
the palm of her hand.

"She always was a spitfire," said Martin, turning to Peggy.

"And they always put the blame on me," Rose said.  "HE had the
school-room.  Where was I to sit?  'Oh, run away and play in the
nursery!'" she waved her hand.

"And so she went into the bathroom and cut her wrist with a knife,"
Martin jeered.

"No, that was Erridge: that was about the microscope," she
corrected him.

It's like a kitten catching its tail, Peggy thought; round and
round they go in a circle.  But it's what they enjoy, she thought;
it's what they come to parties for.  Martin went on teasing Rose.

"And where's your red ribbon?" he was asking.

Some decoration had been given her, Peggy remembered, for her work
in the war.

"Aren't we worthy to see you in your war paint?" he teased her.

"This fellow's jealous," she said, turning to Peggy again.  "He's
never done a stroke of work in his life."

"I work--I work," Martin insisted.  "I sit in an office all day
long--"

"Doing what?" said Rose.

Then they became suddenly silent.  That turn was over--the old-
brother-and-sister turn.  Now they could only go back and repeat
the same thing over again.

"Look here," said Martin, "we must go and do our duty."  He rose.
They parted.



"Doing what?" Peggy repeated, as she crossed the room.  "Doing
what?" she repeated.  She was feeling reckless; nothing that she
did mattered.  She walked to the window and twitched the curtain
apart.  There were the stars pricked in little holes in the blue-
black sky.  There was a row of chimney-pots against the sky.  Then
the stars.  Inscrutable, eternal, indifferent--those were the
words; the right words.  But I don't feel it, she said, looking at
the stars.  So why pretend to?  What they're really like, she
thought, screwing up her eyes to look at them, is little bits of
frosty steel.  And the moon--there it was--is a polished dish-
cover.  But she felt nothing, even when she had reduced moon and
stars to that.  Then she turned and found herself face to face with
a young man she thought she knew but could not put a name to.  He
had a fine brow, but a receding chin and he was pale, pasty.

"How-d'you-do?" she said.  Was his name Leacock or Laycock?

"Last time we met," she said, "was at the races."  She connected
him, incongruously, with a Cornish field, stone walls, farmers and
rough ponies jumping.

"No, that's Paul," he said.  "My brother Paul."  He was tart about
it.  What did he do, then, that made him superior in his own esteem
to Paul?

"You live in London?" she said.

He nodded.

"You write?" she hazarded.  But why, because he was a writer--she
remembered now seeing his name in the papers--throw your head back
when you say "Yes"?  She preferred Paul; he looked healthy; this
one had a queer face; knit up; nerve-drawn; fixed.

"Poetry?" she said.

"Yes."  But why bite off that word as if it were a cherry on the
end of a stalk? she thought.  There was nobody coming; they were
bound to sit down side by side, on chairs by the wall.

"How do you manage, if you're in an office?" she said.  Apparently
in his spare time.

"My uncle," he began.  ". . . You've met him?"

Yes, a nice commonplace man; he had been very kind to her about a
passport once.  This boy, of course, though she only half listened,
sneered at him.  Then why go into his office? she asked herself.
My people, he was saying . . . hunted.  Her attention wandered.
She had heard it all before.  I, I, I--he went on.  It was like a
vulture's beak pecking, or a vacuum-cleaner sucking, or a telephone
bell ringing.  I, I, I.  But he couldn't help it, not with that
nerve-drawn egotist's face, she thought, glancing at him.  He could
not free himself, could not detach himself.  He was bound on the
wheel with tight iron hoops.  He had to expose, had to exhibit.
But why let him? she thought, as he went on talking.  For what do I
care about his "I, I, I"?  Or his poetry?  Let me shake him off
then, she said to herself, feeling like a person whose blood has
been sucked, leaving all the nerve-centres pale.  She paused.  He
noted her lack of sympathy.  He thought her stupid, she supposed.

"I'm tired," she apologised.  "I've been up all night," she
explained.  "I'm a doctor--"

The fire went out of his face when she said "I."  That's done it--
now he'll go, she thought.  He can't be "you"--he must be "I."  She
smiled.  For up he got and off he went.



She turned round and stood at the window.  Poor little wretch, she
thought; atrophied, withered; cold as steel; hard as steel; bald as
steel.  And I too, she thought, looking at the sky.  The stars
seemed pricked haphazard in the sky, except that there, to the
right over the chimney-pots, hung that phantom wheel-barrow--what
did they call it?  The name escaped her.  I will count them, she
thought, returning to her notebook, and had begun one, two, three,
four . . . when a voice exclaimed behind her:  "Peggy!  Aren't your
ears tingling?"  She turned.  It was Delia of course, with her
genial ways, her imitation Irish flattery: "--because they ought to
be," said Delia, laying a hand on her shoulder, "considering what
HE'S been saying"--she pointed to a grey-haired man--"what praises
he's been singing of you."

Peggy looked where she pointed.  There was her teacher over there,
her master.  Yes, she knew he thought her clever.  She was, she
supposed.  They all said so.  Very clever.

"He's been telling me--" Delia began.  But she broke off.

"Just help me open this window," she said.  "It's getting hot."

"Let me," said Peggy.  She gave the window a jerk, but it stuck,
for it was old and the frames did not fit.

"Here, Peggy," said somebody, coming behind her.  It was her
father.  His hand was on the window, his hand with the scar.  He
pushed; the window went up.

"Thanks, Morris, that's better," said Delia.  "I was telling Peggy
her ears ought to be tingling," she began again:  "'My most
brilliant pupil!'  That's what HE said," Delia went on.  "I assure
you I felt quite proud.  'But she's my niece,' I said.  He hadn't
known it--"

There, said Peggy, that's pleasure.  The nerve down her spine
seemed to tingle as the praise reached her father.  Each emotion
touched a different nerve.  A sneer rasped the thigh; pleasure
thrilled the spine; and also affected the sight.  The stars had
softened; they quivered.  Her father brushed her shoulder as he
dropped his hand; but neither of them spoke.

"D'you want it open at the bottom too?" he said.

"No, that'll do," said Delia.  "The room's getting hot," she said.
"People are beginning to come.  They must use the rooms
downstairs," she said.  "But who's that out there?" she pointed.
Opposite the house against the railings of the square was a group
in evening dress.

"I think I recognise one of them," said Morris, looking out.
"That's North, isn't it?"

"Yes, that's North," said Peggy, looking out.

"Then why don't they come in?" said Delia, tapping on the window.



"But you must come and see it for yourselves," North was saying.
They had asked him to describe Africa.  He had said that there were
mountains and plains; it was silent, he had said, and birds sang.
He stopped; it was difficult to describe a place to people who had
not seen it.  Then curtains in the house opposite parted, and three
heads appeared at the window.  They looked at the heads outlined on
the window opposite them.  They were standing with their backs to
the railings of the square.  The trees hung dark showers of leaves
over them.  The trees had become part of the sky.  Now and then
they seemed to shift and shuffle slightly as a breeze went through
them.  A star shone among the leaves.  It was silent too; the
murmur of the traffic was run together into one far hum.  A cat
slunk past; for a second they saw the luminous green of the eyes;
then it was extinguished.  The cat crossed the lighted space and
vanished.  Someone tapped again on the window and cried, "Come in!"

"Come!" said Renny, and threw his cigar into the bushes behind him.
"Come, we must."



They went upstairs, past the doors of offices, past long windows
that opened on to back gardens that lay behind houses.  Trees in
full leaf stretched their branches across at different levels; the
leaves, here bright green in the artificial light, here dark in
shadow, moved up and down in the little breeze.  Then they came to
the private part of the house, where the red carpet was laid; and a
roar of voices sounded from behind a door as if a flock of sheep
were penned there.  Then music, a dance, swung out.

"Now," said Maggie, pausing for a moment, outside the door.  She
gave their names to the servant.

"And you, sir?" said the maid to North, who hung behind.

"Captain Pargiter," said North, touching his tie.

"And Captain Pargiter!" the maid called out.



Delia was upon them instantly.  "And Captain Pargiter!" she
exclaimed, as she came hurrying across the room.  "How very nice of
you to come!" she exclaimed.  She took their hands at random, here
a left hand, there a right hand, in her left hand, in her right
hand.

"I thought it was you," she exclaimed, "standing in the square.  I
thought I could recognise Renny--but I wasn't sure about North.
Captain Pargiter!" she wrung his hand, "you're quite a stranger--
but a very welcome one!  Now who d'you know?  Who don't you know?"

She glanced round, twitching her shawl rather nervously.

"Let me see, there's all your uncles and aunts; and your cousins;
and your sons and daughters--yes, Maggie, I saw your lovely couple
not long ago.  They're somewhere. . . .  Only all the generations
in our family are so mixed; cousins and aunts, uncles and brothers--
but perhaps it's a good thing."

She stopped rather suddenly as if she had used up that vein.  She
twitched her shawl.

"They're going to dance," she said, pointing at the young man who
was putting another record on the gramophone.  "It's all right for
dancing," she added, referring to the gramophone.  "Not for music."
She became simple for a moment.  "I can't bear music on the
gramophone.  But dance music--that's another thing.  And young
people--don't you find that?--must dance.  It's right they should.
Dance or not--just as you like."  She waved her hand.

"Yes, just as you like," her husband echoed her.  He stood beside
her, dangling his hands in front of him like a bear on which coats
are hung in a hotel.

"Just as you like," he repeated, shaking his paws.

"Help me to move the tables, North," said Delia.  "If they're going
to dance, they'll want everything out of the way--and the rugs
rolled up."  She pushed a table out of the way.  Then she ran
across the room to whisk a chair against the wall.

Now one of the vases was upset, and a stream of water flowed across
the carpet.

"Don't mind it, don't mind it--it doesn't matter at all!" Delia
exclaimed, assuming the manner of a harum-scarum Irish hostess.
But North stooped and swabbed up the water.

"And what are you going to do with that pocket handkerchief?"
Eleanor asked him; she had joined them in her flowing red cloak.

"Hang it on a chair to dry," said North, walking off.

"And you, Sally?" said Eleanor, drawing back against the wall since
they were going to dance.  "Going to dance?" she asked, sitting
down.

"I?" said Sara, yawning.  "I want to sleep."  She sank down on a
cushion beside Eleanor.

"But you don't come to parties," Eleanor laughed, looking down at
her, "to sleep, do you?"  Again she saw the little picture she had
seen at the end of the telephone.  But she could not see her face;
only the top of her head.

"Dining with you, wasn't he?" she said, as North passed them with
his handkerchief.

"And what did you talk about?" she asked.  She saw her, sitting on
the edge of a chair, swinging her foot up and down, with a smudge
on her nose.

"Talk about?" said Sara.  "You, Eleanor."  People were passing them
all the time; they were brushing against their knees; they were
beginning to dance.  It made one feel a little dizzy, Eleanor
thought, sinking back in her chair.

"Me?" she said.  "What about me?"

"Your life," said Sara.

"My life?" Eleanor repeated.  Couples began to twist and turn
slowly past them.  It was a fox-trot that they were dancing, she
supposed.

My life, she said to herself.  That was odd, it was the second time
that evening that somebody had talked about her life.  And I
haven't got one, she thought.  Oughtn't a life to be something you
could handle and produce?--a life of seventy odd years.  But I've
only the present moment, she thought.  Here she was alive, now,
listening to the fox-trot.  Then she looked round.  There was
Morris; Rose; Edward with his head thrown back talking to a man she
did not know.  I'm the only person here, she thought, who remembers
how he sat on the edge of my bed that night, crying--the night
Kitty's engagement was announced.  Yes, things came back to her.  A
long strip of life lay behind her.  Edward crying, Mrs. Levy
talking; snow falling; a sunflower with a crack in it; the yellow
omnibus trotting along the Bayswater Road.  And I thought to
myself, I'm the youngest person in this omnibus; now I'm the
oldest. . . .  Millions of things came back to her.  Atoms danced
apart and massed themselves.  But how did they compose what people
called a life?  She clenched her hands and felt the hard little
coins she was holding.  Perhaps there's "I" at the middle of it,
she thought; a knot; a centre; and again she saw herself sitting at
her table drawing on the blotting-paper, digging little holes from
which spokes radiated.  Out and out they went; thing followed
thing, scene obliterated scene.  And then they say, she thought,
"We've been talking about you!"

"My life . . ." she said aloud, but half to herself.

"Yes?" said Sara, looking up.

Eleanor stopped.  She had forgotten her.  But there was somebody
listening.  Then she must put her thoughts into order; then she
must find words.  But no, she thought, I can't find words; I can't
tell anybody.

"Isn't that Nicholas?" she said, looking at a rather large man who
stood in the doorway.

"Where?" said Sara.  But she looked in the wrong direction.  He had
disappeared.  Perhaps she had been mistaken.  My life's been other
people's lives, Eleanor thought--my father's; Morris's; my friends'
lives; Nicholas's. . . .  Fragments of a conversation with him came
back to her.  Either I'd been lunching with him or dining with him,
she thought.  It was in a restaurant.  There was a parrot with a
pink feather in a cage on the counter.  And they had sat there
talking--it was after the war--about the future; about education.
And he wouldn't let me pay for the wine, she suddenly remembered,
though it was I who ordered it. . . .

Here somebody stopped in front of her.  She looked up.  "Just as I
was thinking of you!" she exclaimed.

It was Nicholas.

"Good-evening, madame!" he said, bending over her in his foreign
way.

"Just as I was thinking of you!" she repeated.  Indeed it was like
a part of her, a sunk part of her, coming to the surface.  "Come
and sit beside me," she said, and pulled up a chair.



"D'you know who that chap is, sitting by my aunt?" said North to
the girl he was dancing with.  She looked round; but vaguely.

"I don't know your aunt," she said.  "I don't know anybody here."

The dance was over and they began walking towards the door.

"I don't even know my hostess," she said.  "I wish you'd point her
out to me."

"There--over there," he said.  He pointed to Delia in her black
dress with the gold spangles.

"Oh, that," she said, looking at her.  "That's my hostess, is it?"
He had not caught the girl's name, and she knew none of them
either.  He was glad of it.  It made him seem different to himself--
it stimulated him.  He shepherded her towards the door.  He wanted
to avoid his relations.  In particular he wanted to avoid his
sister Peggy; but there she was, standing alone by the door.  He
looked the other way; he conveyed his partner out of the door.
There must be a garden or a roof somewhere, he thought, where they
could sit, alone.  She was extraordinarily pretty and young.

"Come along," he said, "downstairs."



"And what were you thinking about me?" said Nicholas, sitting down
beside Eleanor.

She smiled.  There he was in his rather ill-assorted dress-clothes,
with the seal engraved with the arms of his mother the princess,
and his swarthy wrinkled face that always made her think of some
loose-skinned, furry animal, savage to others but kind to herself.
But what was she thinking about him?  She was thinking of him in
the lump; she could not break off little fragments.  The restaurant
had been smoky she remembered.

"How we dined together once in Soho," she said.  ". . . d'you
remember?"

"All the evenings with you I remember, Eleanor," he said.  But his
glance was a little vague.  His attention was distracted.  He was
looking at a lady who had just come in; a well-dressed lady, who
stood with her back to the bookcase equipped for every emergency.
If I can't describe my own life, Eleanor thought, how can I
describe him?  For what he was she did not know; only that it gave
her pleasure when he came in; relieved her of the need of thinking;
and gave her mind a little jog.  He was looking at the lady.  She
seemed upheld by their gaze; vibrating under it.  And suddenly it
seemed to Eleanor that it had all happened before.  So a girl had
come in that night in the restaurant: had stood, vibrating, in the
door.  She knew exactly what he was going to say.  He had said it
before, in the restaurant.  He is going to say, She is like a ball
on the top of a fishmonger's fountain.  As she thought it, he said
it.  Does everything then come over again a little differently? she
thought.  If so, is there a pattern; a theme, recurring, like
music; half remembered, half foreseen? . . . a gigantic pattern,
momentarily perceptible?  The thought gave her extreme pleasure:
that there was a pattern.  But who makes it?  Who thinks it?  Her
mind slipped.  She could not finish her thought.

"Nicholas . . ." she said.  She wanted him to finish it; to take
her thought and carry it out into the open unbroken; to make it
whole, beautiful, entire.

"Tell me, Nicholas . . ." she began; but she had no notion how she
was going to finish her sentence, or what it was that she wanted to
ask him.  He was talking to Sara.  She listened.  He was laughing
at her.  He was pointing at her feet.

". . . coming to a party," he was saying, "with one stocking that
is white, and one stocking that is blue."

"The Queen of England asked me to tea;" Sara hummed in time to the
music; "and which shall it be; the gold or the rose; for all are in
holes, my stockings, said she."  This is their love-making, Eleanor
thought, half listening to their laughter, to their bickering.
Another inch of the pattern, she thought, still using her half-
formulated idea to stamp the immediate scene.  And if this love-
making differs from the old, still it has its charm; it was "love,"
different from the old love, perhaps, but worse, was it?  Anyhow,
she thought, they are aware of each other; they live in each other;
what else is love, she asked, listening to their laughter.

". . . Can you never act for yourself?" he was saying.  "Can you
never even choose stockings for yourself?"

"Never!  Never!"  Sara was laughing.

". . . Because you have no life of your own," he said.  "She lives
in dreams," he added, turning to Eleanor, "alone."

"The professor preaching his little sermon," Sara sneered, laying
her hand on his knee.

"Sara singing her little song," Nicholas laughed, pressing her
hand.

But they are very happy, Eleanor thought: they laugh at each other.

"Tell me, Nicholas . . ." she began again.  But another dance was
beginning.  Couples came flocking back into the room.  Slowly,
intently, with serious faces, as if they were taking part in some
mystic rite which gave them immunity from other feelings, the
dancers began circling past them, brushing against their knees,
almost treading on their toes.  And then someone stopped in front
of them.

"Oh, here's North," said Eleanor, looking up.

"North!" Nicholas exclaimed.  "North!  We met this evening," he
stretched out his hand to North, "--at Eleanor's."

"We did," said North warmly.  Nicholas crushed his fingers; he felt
them separate again when the hand was removed.  It was effusive;
but he liked it.  He was feeling effusive himself.  His eyes shone.
He had lost his puzzled look completely.  His adventure had turned
out well.  The girl had written her name in his pocket-book.  "Come
and see me tomorrow at six," she had said.

"Good-evening again, Eleanor," he said, bowing over her hand.
"You're looking very young.  You're looking extraordinarily
handsome.  I like you in those clothes," he said, looking at her
Indian cloak.

"The same to you, North," she said.  She looked up at him.  She
thought she had never seen him look so handsome, so vigorous.

"Aren't you going to dance?" she asked.  The music was in full
swing.

"Not unless Sally will honour me," he said, bowing to her with
exaggerated courtesy.  What has happened to him? Eleanor thought.
He looks so handsome, so happy.  Sally rose.  She gave her hand to
Nicholas.

"I will dance with you," she said.  They stood for a moment
waiting; and then they circled away.



"What an odd-looking couple!" North exclaimed.  He screwed his face
up into a grin as he watched them.  "They don't know how to dance!"
he added.  He sat down by Eleanor in the chair that Nicholas had
left empty.

"Why don't they marry?" he asked.

"Why should they?" she said.

"Oh, everybody ought to marry," he said.  "And I like him, though
he's a bit of a--shall we say 'bounder?'" he suggested, as he
watched them circling rather awkwardly in and out.

"'Bounder'?" Eleanor echoed him.

"Oh it's his fob, you mean," she added, looking at the gold seal
which swung up and down as Nicholas danced.

"No, not a bounder," she said aloud.  "He's--"

But North was not attending.  He was looking at a couple at the
further end of the room.  They were standing by the fireplace.
Both were young; both were silent; they seemed held still in that
position by some powerful emotion.  As he looked at them, some
emotion about himself, about his own life, came over him, and he
arranged another background for them or for himself--not the
mantelpiece and the bookcase, but cataracts roaring, clouds racing,
and they stood on a cliff above a torrent. . . .

"Marriage isn't for everyone," Eleanor interrupted.

He started.  "No.  Of course not," he agreed.  He looked at her.
She had never married.  Why not? he wondered.  Sacrificed to the
family, he supposed--old Grandpapa without any fingers.  Then some
memory came back to him of a terrace, a cigar and William Whatney.
Was not that her tragedy, that she had loved him?  He looked at her
with affection.  He felt fond of everyone at the moment.

"What luck to find you alone, Nell!" he said, laying his hand on
her knee.

She was touched; the feel of his hand on her knee pleased her.

"Dear North!" she exclaimed.  She felt his excitement through her
dress; he was like a dog on a leash; straining forward with all his
nerves erect, she felt, as he laid his hand on her knee.

"But don't marry the wrong woman!" she said.

"I?" he asked.  "What makes you say that?"  Had she seen him, he
wondered, shepherding the girl downstairs?

"Tell me--" she began.  She wanted to ask him, coolly and sensibly,
what his plans were, now that they were alone; but as she spoke she
saw his face change; an exaggerated expression of horror came over
it.

"Milly!" he muttered.  "Damn her!"



Eleanor glanced quickly over her shoulder.  Her sister Milly,
voluminous in draperies proper to her sex and class, was coming
towards them.  She had grown very stout.  In order to disguise her
figure, veils with beads on them hung down over her arms.  They
were so fat that they reminded North of asparagus; pale asparagus
tapering to a point.

"Oh, Eleanor!" she exclaimed.  For she still kept relics of a
younger sister's doglike devotion.

"Oh, Milly!" said Eleanor, but not so cordially.

"How nice to see you, Eleanor!" said Milly, with her little old-
woman's chuckle; yet there was something deferential in her manner.
"And you too, North!"

She gave him her fat little hand.  He noticed how the rings were
sunk in her fingers, as if the flesh had grown over them.  Flesh
grown over diamonds disgusted him.

"How very nice that you're back again!" she said, settling slowly
down into her chair.  Everything, he felt, became dulled.  She cast
a net over them; she made them all feel one family; he had to think
of their relations in common; but it was an unreal feeling.

"Yes, we're staying with Connie," she said; they had come up for a
cricket match.

He sunk his head.  He looked at his shoes.

"And I've not heard a word about your travels, Nell," she went on.
They fall and fall, and cover all, he went on, as he listened to
the damp falling patter of his aunt's little questions.  But he was
in such a superfluity of high spirits that he could still make her
words jingle.  Did the tarantulas bite, she was asking him, and
were the stars bright?  And where shall I spend tomorrow night? he
added, for the card in his waistcoat pocket rayed out of its own
accord without regard for the context scenes which obliterated the
present moment.  They were staying with Connie, she went on, who
was expecting Jimmy, who was home from Uganda . . . his mind
slipped a few words, for he was seeing a garden, a room, and the
next word he heard was "adenoids"--which is a good word, he said to
himself, separating it from its context; wasp-waisted; pinched in
the middle; with a hard, shining, metallic abdomen, useful to
describe the appearance of an insect--but here a vast bulk
approached; chiefly white waistcoat, lined with black; and Hugh
Gibbs stood over them.  North sprang up to offer him his chair.

"My dear boy, you don't expect me to sit on THAT?" said Hugh,
deriding the rather spindly seat that North offered him.

"You must find me something--" he looked about him, holding his
hands to the sides of his white waistcoat, "more substantial."

North pulled a stuffed seat towards him.  He lowered himself
cautiously.

"Chew, chew, chew," he said as he sat down.

And Milly said, "Tut-tut-tut," North observed.

That was what it came to--thirty years of being husband and wife--
tut-tut-tut--and chew-chew-chew.  It sounded like the half-
inarticulate munchings of animals in a stall.  Tut-tut-tut, and
chew-chew-chew--as they trod out the soft steamy straw in the
stable; as they wallowed in the primeval swamp, prolific, profuse,
half-conscious, he thought; listening vaguely to the good-humoured
patter, which suddenly fastened itself upon him.

"What d'you weigh, North?" his uncle was asking, sizing him up.  He
looked him up and down as if he were a horse.

"We must get you to fix a date," Milly added, "when the boys are
home."

They were inviting him to stay with them at the Towers in September
for cub-hunting.  The men shot, and the women--he looked at his
aunt as if she might be breaking into young even there, on that
chair--the women broke off into innumerable babies.  And those
babies had other babies; and the other babies had--adenoids.  The
word recurred; but it now suggested nothing.  He was sinking; he
was falling under their weight; the name in his pocket even was
fading.  Could nothing be done about it? he asked himself.  Nothing
short of revolution, he thought.  The idea of dynamite, exploding
dumps of heavy earth, shooting earth up in a tree-shaped cloud,
came to his mind, from the War.  But that's all poppy-cock, he
thought; war's poppy-cock, poppy-cock.  Sara's word "poppy-cock"
returned.  So what remains?  Peggy caught his eye, where she stood
talking to an unknown man.  You doctors, he thought, you
scientists, why don't you drop a little crystal into a tumbler,
something starred and sharp, and make them swallow it?  Common
sense; reason; starred and sharp.  But would they swallow it?  He
looked at Hugh.  He had a way of blowing his cheeks in and out, as
he said tut-tut-tut and chew-chew-chew.  Would you swallow it? he
said silently to Hugh.

Hugh turned to him again.

"And I hope you're going to stay in England now, North," he said,
"though I dare say it's a fine life out there?"

And so they turned to Africa and the paucity of jobs.  His
exhilaration was oozing.  The card no longer rayed out pictures.
The damp leaves were falling.  They fall and fall and cover all, he
murmured to himself and looked at his aunt, colourless save for a
brown stain on her forehead; and her hair colourless save for a
stain like the yolk of egg on it.  All over he suspected she must
be soft and discoloured like a pear that has gone sleepy.  And Hugh
himself--his great hand was on his knee--was bound round with raw
beef-steak.  He caught Eleanor's eye.  There was a strained look in
it.

"Yes, how they've spoilt it," she was saying.

But the resonance had gone out of her voice.

"Brand-new villas everywhere," she was saying.  She had been down
in Dorsetshire apparently.

"Little red villas all along the road," she went on.

"Yes, that's what strikes me," he said, rousing himself to help
her, "how you've spoilt England while I've been away."

"But you won't find many changes in our part of the world, North,"
said Hugh.  He spoke with pride.

"No.  But then we're lucky," said Milly.  "We have several large
estates.  We're very lucky," she repeated.  "Except for Mr Phipps,"
she added.  She gave a tart little laugh.

North woke up.  She meant that, he thought.  She spoke with an
acerbity that made her real.  Not only did she become real, but the
village, the great house, the little house, the church and the
circle of old trees also appeared before him in complete reality.
He would stay with them.

"That's our parson," Hugh explained.  "Quite a good chap in his
way; but high--very high.  Candles--that sort of thing."

"And his wife . . ." Milly began.

Here Eleanor sighed.  North looked at her.  She was dropping off to
sleep.  A glazed look, a fixed expression, had come over her face.
She looked terribly like Milly for a moment; sleep brought out the
family likeness.  Then she opened her eyes wide; by an effort of
will she kept them open.  But obviously she saw nothing.

"You must come down and see what you make of us," Hugh said.  "What
about the first week in September, eh?"  He swayed from side to
side as if his benevolence rolled about in him.  He was like an old
elephant who may be going to kneel.  And if he does kneel, how will
he ever get up again, North asked himself.  And if Eleanor falls
sound asleep and snores, what am I going to do, left sitting here
between the knees of the elephant?

He looked round for an excuse to go.

There was Maggie coming along, not looking where she was going.
They saw her.  He felt a strong desire to cry out, "Take care!
Take care!" for she was in the danger zone.  The long white
tentacles that amorphous bodies leave floating so that they can
catch their food, would suck her in.  Yes, they saw her: she was
lost.



"Here's Maggie!" Milly exclaimed, looking up.

"Haven't seen you for an age!" said Hugh, trying to heave himself
up.

She had to stop; to put her hand into that shapeless paw.  Using
the last ounce of energy that remained to him, from the address in
his waistcoat pocket, North rose.  He would carry her off.  He
would save her from the contamination of family life.

But she ignored him.  She stood there, answering their greetings
with perfect composure as if using an outfit provided for
emergencies.  Oh Lord, North said to himself, she's as bad as they
are.  She was glazed; insincere.  They were talking about HER
children now.

"Yes.  That's the baby," she was saying, pointing to a boy who was
dancing with a girl.

"And your daughter, Maggie?" Milly asked, looking round.

North fidgeted.  This is the conspiracy, he said to himself; this
is the steam roller that smooths, obliterates; rounds into
identity; rolls into balls.  He listened.  Jimmy was in Uganda;
Lily was in Leicestershire; MY boy--MY girl . . . they were saying.
But they're not interested in other people's children, he observed.
Only in their own; their own property; their own flesh and blood,
which they would protect with the unsheathed claws of the primeval
swamp, he thought, looking at Milly's fat little paws, even Maggie,
even she.  For she too was talking about my boy, my girl.  How then
can we be civilised, he asked himself?



Eleanor snored.  She was nodding off, shamelessly, helplessly.
There was an obscenity in unconsciousness, he thought.  Her mouth
was open; her head was on one side.

But now it was his turn.  Silence gaped.  One has to egg it on, he
thought; somebody has to say something, or human society would
cease.  Hugh would cease; Milly would cease; and he was about to
apply himself to find something to say, something with which to
feed the immense vacancy of that primeval maw, when Delia, either
from the erratic desire of a hostess always to interrupt, or
divinely inspired by human charity--which he could not say--came
beckoning.

"The Ludbys!" she exclaimed.  "The Ludbys!"

"Oh where?  The dear Ludbys!" said Milly, and up they heaved and
off they went, for the Ludbys, it appeared, seldom left
Northumberland.



"Well, Maggie?" said North, turning to her--but here Eleanor made a
little click at the back of her throat.  Her head pitched forward.
Sleep, now that she slept soundly, had given her dignity.  She
looked peaceful, far from them, rapt in the calm which sometimes
gives the sleeper the look of the dead.  They sat silent, for a
moment, alone together, in private.

"Why--why--why--" he said at last, making a gesture as if he were
plucking tufts of grass from the carpet.

"Why?" Maggie asked.  "Why what?"

"The Gibbses," he murmured.  He jerked his head at them, where they
stood talking by the fireplace.  Gross, obese, shapeless, they
looked to him like a parody, a travesty, an excrescence that had
overgrown the form within, the fire within.

"What's wrong?" he asked.  She looked too.  But she said nothing.
Couples came dancing slowly past them.  A girl stopped, and her
gesture as she raised her hand, unconsciously, had the seriousness
of the very young anticipating life in its goodness which touched
him.

"Why--?" he jerked his thumb in the direction of the young, "when
they're so lovely--"

She too looked at the girl, who was fastening a flower that had
come undone in the front of her frock.  She smiled.  She said
nothing.  Then half consciously she echoed his question without a
meaning in her echo, "Why?"

He was dashed for a moment.  It seemed to him that she refused to
help him.  And he wanted her to help him.  Why should she not take
the weight off his shoulders and give him what he longed for--
assurance, certainty?  Because she too was deformed like the rest
of them?  He looked down at her hands.  They were strong hands;
fine hands; but if it were a question, he thought, watching the
fingers curl slightly, of "my" children, of "my" possessions, it
would be one rip down the belly; or teeth in the soft fur of the
throat.  We cannot help each other, he thought, we are all
deformed.  Yet, disagreeable as it was to him to remove her from
the eminence upon which he placed her, perhaps she was right, he
thought, and we who make idols of other people, who endow this man,
that woman, with power to lead us, only add to the deformity, and
stoop ourselves.

"I'm going to stay with them," he said aloud.

"At the Towers?" she asked.

"Yes," he said.  "For cubbing in September."

She was not listening.  Her eyes were on him.  She was getting him
into relation with something else he felt.  It made him uneasy.
She was looking at him as if he were not himself but somebody else.
He felt again the discomfort that he had felt when Sally described
him on the telephone.

"I know," he said, stiffening the muscles of his face, "I'm like
the picture of a Frenchman holding his hat."

"Holding his hat?" she asked.

"And getting fat," he added.



". . . Holding a hat . . . who's holding a hat?" said Eleanor,
opening her eyes.

She glanced about her in bewilderment.  Since her last
recollection, and it seemed only a second ago, was of Milly talking
of candles in a church, something must have happened.  Milly and
Hugh had been there; but they were gone.  There had been a gap--a
gap filled with the golden light of lolling candles, and some
sensation which she could not name.

She woke up completely.

"What nonsense are you talking?" she said.  "North's not holding a
hat!  And he's not fat," she added.  "Not at all, not at all," she
repeated, patting him affectionately on the knee.

She felt extraordinarily happy.  Most sleep left some dream in
one's mind--some scene or figure remained when one woke up.  But
this sleep, this momentary trance, in which the candles had lolled
and lengthened themselves, had left her with nothing but a feeling;
a feeling, not a dream.

"He's not holding a hat," she repeated.

They both laughed at her.

"You've been dreaming, Eleanor," said Maggie.

"Have I?" she said.  A deep gulf had been cut in the talk, it was
true.  She could not remember what they had been saying.  There was
Maggie; but Milly and Hugh had gone.

"Only a second's nap," she said.  "But what are you going to do,
North?  What are your plans?" she said, speaking rather quickly.

"We musn't let him go back, Maggie," she said.  "Not to that horrid
farm."

She wished to appear extremely practical, partly to prove that she
had not slept, partly to protect the extraordinary feeling of
happiness that still remained with her.  Covered up from
observation it might survive, she felt.

"You've saved enough, haven't you?" she said aloud.

"Saved enough?" he said.  Why, he wondered, did people who had been
asleep always want to make out that they were extremely wide-awake?
"Four or five thousand," he added at random.

"Well, that's enough," she insisted.  "Five per cent; six per cent--"
She tried to do the sum in her head.  She appealed to Maggie
for help.  "Four or five thousand--how much would that be, Maggie?
Enough to live on, wouldn't it?"

"Four or five thousand," repeated Maggie.

"At five or six per cent . . ." Eleanor put in.  She could never do
sums in her head at the best of times; but for some reason it
seemed to her very important to bring things back to facts.  She
opened her bag, found a letter, and produced a stubby little
pencil.

"There--work it out on that," she said.  Maggie took the paper and
drew a few lines with the pencil as if to test it.  North glanced
over her shoulder.  Was she solving the problem before her--was she
considering his life, his needs?  No.  She was drawing, apparently
a caricature--he looked--of a big man opposite in a white
waistcoat.  It was a farce.  It made him feel slightly ridiculous.

"Don't be so silly," he said.

"That's my brother," she said, nodding at the man in the white
waistcoat.  "He used to take us for rides on an elephant. . . ."
She added a flourish to the waistcoat.

"And we're being very sensible," Eleanor protested.

"If you want to live in England, North--if you want--"

He cut her short.

"I don't know what I want," he said.

"Oh, I see!" she said.  She laughed.  Her feeling of happiness
returned to her, her unreasonable exaltation.  It seemed to her
that they were all young, with the future before them.  Nothing was
fixed; nothing was known; life was open and free before them.

"Isn't that odd?" she exclaimed.  "Isn't that queer?  Isn't that
why life's a perpetual--what shall I call it?--miracle? . . .  I
mean," she tried to explain, for he looked puzzled, "old age they
say is like this; but it isn't.  It's different; quite different.
So when I was a child; so when I was a girl; it's been a perpetual
discovery, my life.  A miracle."  She stopped.  She was rambling on
again.  She felt rather light-headed, after her dream.

"There's Peggy!" she exclaimed, glad to attach herself to something
solid.  "Look at her!  Reading a book!"



Peggy, marooned when the dance started, over by the bookcase, stood
as close to it as she could.  In order to cover her loneliness she
took down a book.  It was bound in green leather; and had, she
noted as she turned it in her hands, little gilt stars tooled upon
it.  Which is all to the good, she thought, turning it over,
because then it'll seem as if I were admiring the binding. . . .
But I can't stand here admiring the binding, she thought.  She
opened it.  He'll say what I'm thinking, she thought as she did so.
Books opened at random always did.

"La m�diocrit� de l'univers m'�tonne et me r�volte" she read.  That
was it.  Precisely.  She read on.  ". . . la petitesse de toutes
choses m'emplit de d�go�t . . ."  She lifted her eyes.  They were
treading on her toes.  ". . .  la pauvret� des �tres humains
m'an�antit."  She shut the book and put it back on the shelf.

Precisely, she said.

She turned her watch on her wrist and looked at it surreptitiously.
Time was getting on.  An hour is sixty minutes, she said to
herself; two hours are one hundred and twenty minutes.  How many
have I still to stay here?  Could she go yet?  She saw Eleanor
beckoning.  She put the book back on the shelf.  She went towards
them.



"Come, Peggy, come and talk to us," Eleanor called out, beckoning.

"D'you know what time it is, Eleanor?" said Peggy, coming up to
them.  She pointed to her watch.  "Don't you think it's time to be
going?" she said.

"I'd forgotten the time," said Eleanor.

"But you'll be so tired tomorrow," Peggy protested, standing beside
her.

"How like a doctor!" North twitted her.  "Health, health, health!"
he exclaimed.  "But health's not an end in itself," he said,
looking up at her.

She ignored him.

"D'you mean to stay to the end?" she said to Eleanor.  "This'll go
on all night."  She looked at the twisting couples gyrating in time
to the tune on the gramophone, as if some animal were dying in a
slow but exquisite anguish.

"But we're enjoying ourselves," said Eleanor.  "Come and enjoy
yourself too."

She pointed to the floor at her side.  Peggy let herself down onto
the floor at her side.  Give up brooding, thinking, analysing,
Eleanor meant she knew.  Enjoy the moment--but could one? she
asked, pulling her skirts round her feet as she sat down.  Eleanor
bent over and tapped her on the shoulder.

"I want you to tell me," she said, drawing her into the
conversation, since she looked so glum, "you're a doctor--you know
these things--what do dreams mean?"

Peggy laughed.  Another of Eleanor's questions.  Does two and two
make four--and what is the nature of the universe?

"I don't mean dreams exactly," Eleanor went on.  "Feelings--
feelings that come when one's asleep?"

"My dear Nell," said Peggy, glancing up at her, "how often have I
told you?  Doctors know very little about the body; absolutely
nothing about the mind."  She looked down again.

"I always said they were humbugs!" North exclaimed.

"What a pity!" said Eleanor.  "I was hoping you'd be able to
explain to me--"  She was bending down.  There was a flush on her
cheek, Peggy noted; she was excited; but what was there to be
excited about?

"Explain--what?" she asked.

"Oh, nothing," said Eleanor.  Now I've snubbed her, Peggy thought.

She looked at her again.  Her eyes were bright; her cheeks were
flushed, or was it only the tan from her voyage to India?  And a
little vein stood out on her forehead.  But what was there to be
excited about?  She leant back against the wall.  From her seat on
the floor she had a queer view of people's feet; feet pointing this
way, feet pointing that way; patent leather pumps; satin slippers;
silk stockings and socks.  They were dancing rhythmically,
insistently, to the tune of the fox-trot.  And what about the
cocktail and the tea, said he to me, said he to me--the tune seemed
to repeat over and over again.  And voices went on over her head.
Odd little gusts of inconsecutive conversations reached her . . .
down in Norfolk where my brother-in-law has a boat . . .  Oh, a
complete washout, yes I agree. . . .  People talked nonsense at
parties.  And beside her Maggie was talking; North was talking;
Eleanor was talking.  Suddenly Eleanor swept her hand out.

"There's Renny!" she was saying.  "Renny, whom I never see.  Renny
whom I love. . . .  Come and talk to us, Renny."  And a pair of
pumps crossed Peggy's field of vision and stopped in front of her.
He sat down beside Eleanor.  She could just see the line of his
profile; the big nose; the thin cheek.  And what about the
cocktails and the tea, said he to me, said he to me, the music
ground out; the couples danced past.  But the little group on the
chairs above her were talking; they were laughing.

"I know you'll agree with me . . ." Eleanor was saying.  Through
her half-shut eyes Peggy could see Renny turn towards her.  She saw
his thin cheek; his big nose; his nails, she noticed, were very
close cut.

"Depends what you were saying . . ." he said.

"What were we saying?" Eleanor pondered.  She's forgotten already,
Peggy suspected.

". . . That things have changed for the better," she heard
Eleanor's voice.

"Since you were a girl?"  That she thought was Maggie's voice.

Then a voice from a skirt with a pink bow on the hem interrupted.
". . . I don't know how it is but the heat doesn't affect me as
much as it used to do. . . ."  She looked up.  There were fifteen
pink bows on the dress, accurately stitched, and wasn't that Miriam
Parrish's little saint-like, sheep-like head on top?

"What I mean is, we've changed in ourselves," Eleanor was saying.
"We're happier--we're freer--"

What does she mean by "happiness," by "freedom"?  Peggy asked
herself, lapsing against the wall again.

"Take Renny and Maggie," she heard Eleanor saying.  And then she
stopped.  And then she went on again:

"D'you remember, Renny, the night of the raid?  When I met Nicholas
for the first time . . . when we sat in the cellar? . . .  Going
downstairs I said to myself, That's a happy marriage--"  There was
another pause.  "I said to myself," she continued, and Peggy saw
her hand laid on Renny's knee, "If I'd known Renny when I was
young. . . ."  She stopped.  Does she mean she would have fallen in
love with him?  Peggy wondered.  Again the music interrupted . . .
said he to me, said he to me. . . .

"No, never . . ." she heard Eleanor say.  "No, never. . . ."  Was
she saying she had never been in love, never wanted to marry?
Peggy wondered.  They were laughing.

"Why, you look like a girl of eighteen!" she heard North say.

"And I feel like one!" Eleanor exclaimed.  But you'll be a wreck
tomorrow morning Peggy thought, looking at her.  She was flushed,
the veins stood out on her forehead.

"I feel . . ." she stopped.  She put her hand to her head: "as if
I'd been in another world!  So happy!" she exclaimed.

"Tosh, Eleanor, tosh," said Renny.

I thought he'd say that, Peggy said to herself with some queer
satisfaction.  She could see his profile as he sat on the other
side of her aunt's knee.  The French are logical; they are
sensible, she thought.  Still, she added, why not let Eleanor have
her little flutter if she enjoys it?

"Tosh?  What d'you mean by 'tosh'?" Eleanor was asking.  She was
leaning forward; she held her hand up as if she wanted him to
speak.

"Always talking of the other world," he said.  "Why not this one?"

"But I meant this world!" she said.  "I meant, happy in this world--
happy with living people."  She waved her hand as if to embrace
the miscellaneous company, the young, the old, the dancers, the
talkers; Miriam with her pink bows, and the Indian in his turban.
Peggy sank back against the wall.  Happy in this world, she
thought, happy with living people!

The music stopped.  The young man who had been putting records on
the gramophone had walked off.  The couples broke apart and began
to push their way through the door.  They were going to eat
perhaps; they were going to stream out into the back garden and sit
on hard sooty chairs.  The music which had been cutting grooves in
her mind had ceased.  There was a lull--a silence.  Far away she
heard the sounds of the London night; a horn hooted; a siren wailed
on the river.  The far-away sounds, the suggestion they brought in
of other worlds, indifferent to this world, of people toiling,
grinding, in the heart of darkness, in the depths of night, made
her say over Eleanor's words, Happy in this world, happy with
living people.  But how can one be "happy"? she asked herself, in a
world bursting with misery.  On every placard at every street
corner was Death; or worse--tyranny; brutality; torture; the fall
of civilisation; the end of freedom.  We here, she thought, are
only sheltering under a leaf, which will be destroyed.  And then
Eleanor says the world is better, because two people out of all
those millions are "happy."  Her eyes had fixed themselves on the
floor; it was empty now save for a wisp of muslin torn from some
skirt.  But why do I notice everything? she thought.  She shifted
her position.  Why must I think?  She did not want to think.  She
wished that there were blinds like those in railway carriages that
came down over the light and hooded the mind.  The blue blind that
one pulls down on a night journey, she thought.  Thinking was
torment; why not give up thinking, and drift and dream?  But the
misery of the world, she thought, forces me to think.  Or was that
a pose?  Was she not seeing herself in the becoming attitude of one
who points to his bleeding heart? to whom the miseries of the world
are misery, when in fact, she thought, I do not love my kind.
Again she saw the ruby-splashed pavement, and faces mobbed at the
door of a picture palace; apathetic, passive faces; the faces of
people drugged with cheap pleasures; who had not even the courage
to be themselves, but must dress up, imitate, pretend.  And here,
in this room, she thought, fixing her eyes on a couple. . . .  But
I will not think, she repeated; she would force her mind to become
a blank and lie back, and accept quietly, tolerantly, whatever
came.

She listened.  Scraps reached her from above.  ". . .  flats in
Highgate have bathrooms," they were saying.  ". . . Your mother . . .
Digby. . . .  Yes, Crosby's still alive--"  It was family gossip,
and they were enjoying it.  But how can I enjoy it? she said to
herself.  She was too tired; the skin round her eyes felt taut; a
hoop was bound tight over her head; she tried to think herself away
into the darkness of the country.  But it was impossible; they were
laughing.  She opened her eyes, exacerbated by their laughter.

That was Renny laughing.  He held a sheet of paper in his hand; his
head was flung back; his mouth was wide open.  From it came a sound
like Ha!  Ha!  Ha!  That is laughter, she said to herself.  That is
the sound people make when they are amused.

She watched him.  Her muscles began to twitch involuntarily.  She
could not help laughing too.  She stretched out her hand and Renny
gave her the paper.  It was folded; they had been playing a game.
Each of them had drawn a different part of a picture.  On top there
was a woman's head like Queen Alexandra, with a fuzz of little
curls; then a bird's neck; the body of a tiger; and stout
elephant's legs dressed in child's drawers completed the picture.

"I drew that--I drew that!" said Renny pointing to the legs from
which a long trail of ribbon depended.  She laughed, laughed,
laughed; she could not help laughing.

"The face that launched a thousand ships!" said North, pointing to
another part of the monster's person.  They all laughed again.  She
stopped laughing; her lips smoothed themselves out.  But her
laughter had had some strange effect on her.  It had relaxed her,
enlarged her.  She felt, or rather she saw, not a place, but a
state of being, in which there was real laughter, real happiness,
and this fractured world was whole; whole, and free.  But how could
she say it?

"Look here . . ." she began.  She wanted to express something that
she felt to be very important; about a world in which people were
whole, in which people were free . . .  But they were laughing; she
was serious.  "Look here . . ." she began again.

Eleanor stopped laughing.

"Peggy wants to say something," she said.  The others stopped
talking, but they had stopped at the wrong moment.  She had nothing
to say when it came to the point, and yet she had to speak.

"Here," she began again, "here you all are--talking about North--"
He looked up at her in surprise.  It was not what she had meant to
say, but she must go on now that she had begun.  Their faces gaped
at her like birds with their mouths open.  ". . . How he's to live,
where he's to live," she went on.  ". . . But what's the use,
what's the point of saying that?"

She looked at her brother.  A feeling of animosity possessed her.
He was still smiling, but his smile smoothed itself out as she
looked at him.

"What's the use?" she said, facing him.  "You'll marry.  You'll
have children.  What'll you do then?  Make money.  Write little
books to make money. . . ."

She had got it wrong.  She had meant to say something impersonal,
but she was being personal.  It was done now however; she must
flounder on now.

"You'll write one little book, and then another little book," she
said viciously, "instead of living . . . living differently,
differently."

She stopped.  There was the vision still, but she had not grasped
it.  She had broken off only a little fragment of what she meant to
say, and she had made her brother angry.  Yet there it hung before
her, the thing she had seen, the thing she had not said.  But as
she fell back with a jerk against the wall, she felt relieved of
some oppression; her heart thumped; the veins on her forehead stood
out.  She had not said it, but she had tried to say it.  Now she
could rest; now she could think herself away under the shadow of
their ridicule, which had no power to hurt her, into the country.
Her eyes half shut; it seemed to her that she was on a terrace, in
the evening; an owl went up and down, up and down; its white wing
showed on the dark of the hedge; and she heard country people
singing and the rattle of wheels on a road.

Then gradually the blur became distinct; she saw the line of the
bookcase opposite; the wisp of muslin on the floor; and two large
feet, in tight shoes, so that the bunions showed, stopped in front
of her.



For a moment nobody moved; nobody spoke.  Peggy sat still.  She did
not want to move, or to speak.  She wanted to rest, to lean, to
dream.  She felt very tired.  Then more feet stopped, and the hem
of a black skirt.

"Aren't you people coming down to supper?" said a chuckling little
voice.  She looked up.  It was her aunt Milly, with her husband by
her side.

"Supper's downstairs," said Hugh.  "Supper's downstairs."  And they
passed on.

"How prosperous they've grown!" said North's voice, laughing at
them.

"Ah, but they're so good to people . . ." Eleanor protested.  The
sense of the family again, Peggy noted.

Then the knee against which she was sheltering herself moved.

"We must go," said Eleanor.  Wait, wait, Peggy wanted to implore
her.  There was something she wanted to ask her; something she
wanted to add to her outburst, since nobody had attacked her, and
nobody had laughed at her.  But it was useless; the knees
straightened themselves; the red cloak elongated itself; Eleanor
had risen.  She was hunting for her bag or her handkerchief; she
was ferreting in the cushions of her chair.  As usual, she had lost
something.

"I'm sorry to be such an old muddler," she apologised.  She shook a
cushion; coins rolled out onto the floor.  A sixpenny bit spun on
its edge across the carpet, reached a pair of silver shoes on the
floor and fell flat.

"There!" Eleanor exclaimed.  "There! . . .  But that's Kitty! isn't
it?" she exclaimed.

Peggy looked up.  A handsome elderly woman, with curled white hair
and something shining in her hair was standing in the doorway
looking round her, as if she had just come in and were looking for
her hostess, who was not there.  It was at her feet that the
sixpence had fallen.

"Kitty!" Eleanor repeated.  She went towards her with her hands
stretched out.  They all got up.  Peggy got up.  Yes, it was over;
it was destroyed she felt.  Directly something got together, it
broke.  She had a feeling of desolation.  And then you have to pick
up the pieces, and make something new, something different, she
thought, and crossed the room, and joined the foreigner, the man
she called Brown, whose real name was Nicholas Pomjalovsky.



"Who is that lady," Nicholas asked her, "who appears to come into a
room as if the whole world belonged to her?"

"That's Kitty Lasswade," said Peggy.  As she stood in the door,
they could not pass.

"I'm afraid I'm dreadfully late," they heard her saying in her
clear, authoritative tones.  "But I've been to the ballet."

That's Kitty, is it? North said to himself, looking at her.  She
was one of those well-set-up rather masculine old ladies who
repelled him slightly.  He thought he remembered that she was the
wife of one of our governors; or was it the Viceroy of India?  He
could see her, as she stood there, doing the honours of Government
House.  "Sit here.  Sit there.  And you, young man, I hope you take
plenty of exercise?"  He knew the type.  She had a short straight
nose and blue eyes very wide apart.  She might have looked very
dashing in the eighties, he thought; in a tight riding-habit; worn
a small hat, with a cock's feather in it; perhaps had an affair
with an aide-de-camp; and then settled down, become dictatorial,
and told stories about her past.  He listened.

"Ah, but he's not a patch on Nijinsky!" she was saying.

The sort of thing she would say, he thought.  He examined the books
in the bookcase.  He took one out and held it upside down.  One
little book, and then another little book--Peggy's taunt returned
to him.  The words had stung him out of all proportion to their
surface meaning.  She had turned on him with such violence, as if
she despised him; she had looked as if she were going to burst into
tears.  He opened the little book.  Latin, was it?  He broke off a
sentence and let it swim in his mind.  There the words lay,
beautiful, yet meaningless, yet composed in a pattern--nox est
perpetua una dormienda.  He remembered his master saying, Mark the
long word at the end of the sentence.  There the words floated; but
just as they were about to give out their meaning, there was a
movement at the door.  Old Patrick had come ambling up, had given
his arm gallantly to the widow of the Governor-General, and they
were proceeding with a curious air of antiquated ceremony down the
stairs.  The others began to follow them.  The younger generation
following in the wake of the old, North said to himself as he put
the book back on the shelf and followed.  Only, he observed, they
were not so very young; Peggy--there were white hairs on Peggy's
head--she must be thirty-seven, thirty-eight?



"Enjoying yourself, Peg?" he said as they hung back behind the
others.  He had a vague feeling of hostility towards her.  She
seemed to him bitter, disillusioned, and very critical of everyone,
especially of himself.

"You go first, Patrick," they heard Lady Lasswade boom out in her
genial loud voice.  "These staircases are not adapted . . ." she
paused, as she advanced what was probably a rheumatic leg, "for old
people who. . ." there was another pause as she descended another
step, "'ve been kneeling on damp grass killing slugs."

North looked at Peggy and laughed.  He had not expected the
sentence to end like that, but the widows of viceroys, he thought,
always have gardens, always kill slugs.  Peggy smiled too.  But he
felt uncomfortable with her.  She had attacked him.  There they
stood, however, side by side.

"Did you see old William Whatney?" she said, turning to him.

"No!" he exclaimed.  "HE still alive?  That old white walrus with
the whiskers?"

"Yes--that's him," she said.  There was an old man in a white
waistcoat standing in the door.

"The old Mock Turtle," he said.  They had to fall back on childish
slang, on childish memories, to cover their distance, their
hostility.

"D'you remember . . ." he began.

"The night of the row?" she said.  "The night I let myself out of
the window by a rope."

"And we picnicked in the Roman camp," he said.

"We should never have been found out if that horrid little scamp
hadn't told on us," she said, descending a step.

"A little beast with pink eyes," said North.

They could think of nothing else to say, as they stood blocked,
waiting for the others to move on, side by side.  And he used to
read her his poetry in the apple-loft, he remembered, and as they
walked up and down by the rose bushes.  And now they had nothing to
say to each other.

"Perry," he said, descending another step, suddenly remembering the
name of the pink-eyed boy who had seen them coming home that
morning and had told on them.

"Alfred," she added.

She still knew certain things about him, he thought; they still had
something very profound in common.  That was why, he thought, she
had hurt him by what she had said, before the others, about his
"writing little books."  It was their past condemning his present.
He glanced at her.

Damn women, he thought, they're so hard; so unimaginative.  Curse
their little inquisitive minds.  What did their "education" amount
to?  It only made her critical, censorious.  Old Eleanor, with all
her rambling and stumbling, was worth a dozen of Peggy any day.
She was neither one thing nor the other, he thought, glancing at
her; neither in the fashion nor out of it.

She felt him look at her and look away.  He was finding fault with
something about her, she knew.  Her hands?  Her dress?  No, it was
because she criticised him, she thought.  Yes, she thought as she
descended another step, now I'm going to be trounced; now I'm going
to be paid back for telling him he'd write "little books."  It
takes from ten to fifteen minutes, she thought, to get an answer;
and then it'll be something off the point but disagreeable--very,
she thought.  The vanity of men was immeasurable.  She waited.  He
looked at her again.  And now he's comparing me with the girl I saw
him talking to, she thought, and saw again the lovely, hard face.
He'll tie himself up with a red-lipped girl, and become a drudge.
He must, and I can't, she thought.  No, I've a sense of guilt
always.  I shall pay for it, I shall pay for it, I kept saying to
myself even in the Roman camp, she thought.  She would have no
children, and he would produce little Gibbses, more little Gibbses,
she thought, looking in at the door of a solicitor's office, unless
she leaves him at the end of the year for some other man. . . .
The solicitor's name was Alridge, she noted.  But I will take no
more notes; I will enjoy myself, she thought suddenly.  She put her
hand on his arm.

"Met anybody amusing tonight?" she said.

He guessed that she had seen him with the girl.

"One girl," he said briefly.

"So I saw," she said.

She looked away.

"I thought her lovely," she said, carefully observing a tinted
picture of a bird with a long beak that hung on the stairs.

"Shall I bring her to see you?" he asked.

So he cared for her opinion, did he?  Her hand was still on his
arm; she felt something hard and taut beneath the sleeve, and the
touch of his flesh, bringing back to her the nearness of human
beings and their distance, so that if one meant to help one hurt,
yet they depended on each other, produced in her such a tumult of
sensation that she could scarcely keep herself from crying out,
North! North! North!  But I mustn't make a fool of myself again,
she said to herself.

"Any evening after six," she said aloud, carefully descending
another step, and they reached the bottom of the stairs.

A roar of voices sounded from behind the door of the supper room.
She withdrew her hand from his arm.  The door burst open.



"Spoons! spoons! spoons!" cried Delia, brandishing her arms in a
rhetorical manner as if she were still declaiming to someone
inside.  She caught sight of her nephew and niece.  "Be an angel,
North, and fetch spoons!" she cried, throwing her hands out towards
him.

"Spoons for the widow of the Governor-General!" North cried,
catching her manner, imitating her dramatic gesture.

"In the kitchen, in the basement!" Delia cried, waving her arm at
the kitchen stairs.  "Come, Peggy, come," she said, catching
Peggy's hand in hers, "we're all sitting down to supper."  She
burst into the room where they were having supper.  It was crowded.
People were sitting on the floor, on chairs, on office stools.
Long office tables, little typewriting tables, had been pressed
into use.  They were strewn with flowers, frilled with flowers.
Carnations, roses, daisies, were flung down higgledy-piggledy.
"Sit on the floor, sit anywhere," Delia commanded, waving her hand
promiscuously.

"Spoons are coming," she said to Lady Lasswade, who was drinking
her soup out of a mug.

"But I don't want a spoon," said Kitty.  She tilted the mug and
drank.

"No, you wouldn't," said Delia, "but other people do."

North brought in a bunch of spoons and she took them from him.

"Now who wants a spoon and who doesn't?" she said, brandishing the
bunch of spoons in front of her.  Some people do and some don't,
she thought.

Her sort of people, she thought, did not want spoons; the others--
the English--did.  She had been making that distinction between
people all her life.

"A spoon?  A spoon?" she said, looking round her at the crowded
room with some complacency.  All sorts of people were there, she
noted.  That had always been her aim; to mix people; to do away
with the absurd conventions of English life.  And she had done it
tonight, she thought.  There were nobles and commoners; people
dressed and people not dressed; people drinking out of mugs, and
people waiting with their soup getting cold for a spoon to be
brought to them.

"A spoon for me," said her husband, looking up at her.

She wrinkled her nose.  For the thousandth time he had dashed her
dream.  Thinking to marry a wild rebel, she had married the most
King-respecting, Empire-admiring of country gentlemen, and for that
very reason partly--because he was, even now, such a magnificent
figure of a man.  "A spoon for your Uncle," she said dryly, and
sent North off with the bunch.  Then she sat down beside Kitty, who
was gulping her soup like a child at a school treat.  She set down
her mug empty, among the flowers.

"Poor flowers," she said, taking up a carnation that lay on the
table-cloth and putting it to her lips.  "They'll die, Delia--they
want water."

"Roses are cheap today," said Delia.  "Twopence a bunch off a
barrow in Oxford Street," she said.  She took up a red rose and
held it under the light, so that it shone, veined, semi-
transparent.

"What a rich country England is!" she said, laying it down again.
She took up her mug.

"What I'm always telling you," said Patrick, wiping his mouth.
"The only civilised country in the whole world," he added.

"I thought we were on the verge of a smash," said Kitty.  "Not that
it looked much like it at Covent Garden tonight," she added.

"Ah, but it's true," he sighed, going on with his own thoughts.
"I'm sorry to say it--but we're savages compared with you."

"He won't be happy till he's got Dublin Castle back again," Delia
twitted him.

"You don't enjoy your freedom?" said Kitty, looking at the queer
old man whose face always made her think of a hairy gooseberry.
But his body was magnificent.

"It seems to me that our new freedom is a good deal worse than our
old slavery," said Patrick, fumbling with his toothpick.

Politics as usual, money and politics, North thought, overhearing
them, as he went round with the last of his spoons.

"You're not going to tell me that all that struggle has been in
vain, Patrick?" said Kitty.

"Come to Ireland and see for yourself, m'lady," he said grimly.

"It's too early--too early to tell," said Delia.

Her husband looked past her with the sad innocent eyes of an old
sporting dog whose hunting days are over.  But they could not keep
their fixity for long.  "Who's this chap with the spoons?" he said,
resting his eyes on North, who stood just behind them, waiting.

"North," said Delia.  "Come and sit by us, North."

"Good-evening to you, Sir," said Patrick.  They had met already,
but he had already forgotten.

"What, Morris's son?" said Kitty, turning round abruptly.  She
shook hands cordially.  He sat down and took a gulp of soup.

"He's just back from Africa.  He's been on a farm there," said
Delia.

"And how does the old country strike you?" said Patrick, leaning
towards him genially.

"Very crowded," he said, looking round the room.  "And you all
talk," he added, "about money and politics."  That was his stock
phrase.  He had said it twenty times already.

"You were in Africa?" said Lady Lasswade.  "And what made you give
up your farm?" she demanded.  She looked him in the eyes and spoke
just as he expected she would speak; too imperiously for his
liking.  What business is that of yours, old lady? he asked
himself.

"I'd had about enough of it," he said aloud.

"And I'd have given anything to be a farmer!" she exclaimed.  That
was a little out of the picture, North thought.  So were her eyes;
she ought to have worn a pince-nez; but she did not.

"But in my youth," she said, rather fiercely--her hands were rather
stubby, and the skin was rough, but she gardened, he remembered--
"that wasn't allowed."

"No," said Patrick.  "And it's my belief," he continued, drumming
on the table with a fork, "that we should all be very glad, very
glad, to go back to things as they were.  What's the War done for
us, eh?  Ruined me for one."  He wagged his head with melancholy
tolerance from side to side.

"I'm sorry to hear that," said Kitty.  "But speaking for myself,
the old days were bad days, wicked days, cruel days. . . ."  Her
eyes turned blue with passion.

What about the aide-de-camp, and the hat with a cock's feather in
it? North asked himself.

"Don't you agree with me, Delia?" said Kitty, turning to her.

But Delia was talking across her, using her rather exaggerated
Irish sing-song to someone at the next table.  Don't I remember
this room, Kitty thought; a meeting; an argument.  But what was it
about?  Force . . .

"My dear Kitty," Patrick interrupted, patting her hand with his
great paw.  "That's another instance of what I'm telling you.  Now
these ladies have got the vote," he said, turning to North, "are
they any better off?"

Kitty looked fierce for a moment; then she smiled.

"We won't argue, my old friend," she said, giving him a little pat
on the hand.

"And it's just the same with the Irish," he went on.  North saw
that he was bent on treading out the round of his familiar thoughts
like an old broken-winded horse.  "They'd be glad enough to join
the Empire again, I assure you.  I come of a family," he said to
North, "that has served its king and country for three hundred--"

"English settlers," said Delia, rather shortly, returning to her
soup.  That's what they quarrel about when they're alone, North
thought.

"We've been three hundred years in the country," old Patrick
continued, padding out his round--he laid a hand on North's arm,
"and what strikes an old fellow like me, an old fogy like me--"

"Nonsense, Patrick," Delia struck in, "I've never seen you look
younger.  Might be fifty, mightn't he, North?"

But Patrick shook his head.

"I shan't see seventy again," he said simply.  ". . . But what
strikes an old fellow like me," he continued, patting North's arm,
"is with such a lot of good feeling about," he nodded rather
vaguely at a placard that was pinned to the wall--"and nice things
too,"--he referred perhaps to the flowers, but his head jerked
involuntarily as he talked--"what do these fellows want to be
shooting each other for?  I don't join any societies; I don't sign
any of these"--he pointed to the placard--"what d'you call 'em?
manifestoes--I just go to my friend Mike, or it may be Pat--they're
all good friends of mine, and we--"

He stooped and pinched his foot.

"Lord, these shoes!" he complained.

"Tight, are they?" said Kitty.  "Kick 'em off."

Why had the poor old boy been brought over here, North wondered,
and stuck into those tight shoes?  He was clearly talking to his
dogs.  There was a look in his eyes now when he raised them again
and tried to recover the drift of what he had been saying that was
like the look of a sportsman who saw the birds rising in a
semicircle over the wide green bog.  But they were out of shot.  He
could not remember where he had got to.  ". . . We talk things
over," he said, "round a table."  His eyes became mild and vacant
as if the engine were cut off, and his mind glided on silently.

"The English talk too," said North perfunctorily.  Patrick nodded,
and looked vaguely at a group of young people.  But he was not
interested in what other people were saying.  His mind could no
longer stretch beyond its beat.  His body was still beautifully
proportioned; it was his mind that was old.  He would say the same
thing all over again, and when he had said it he would pick his
teeth and sit gazing in front of him.  There he sat now, holding a
flower between his finger and thumb, loosely, without looking at
it, as if his mind were gliding on--But Delia interrupted.

"North must go and talk to his friends," she said.  Like so many
wives, she saw when her husband was becoming a bore, North thought,
as he got up.

"Don't wait to be introduced," said Delia, waving her hand.  "Do
just what you like--just what you like," her husband echoed her,
beating on the table with his flower.



North was glad to go; but where was he to go now?  He was an
outsider, he felt again, as he glanced round the room.  All these
people knew each other.  They called each other--he stood on the
outskirts of a little group of young men and women--by their
Christian names, by their nicknames.  Each was already part of a
little group, he felt as he listened, keeping on the outskirts.  He
wanted to hear what they were saying; but not to be drawn in
himself.  He listened.  They were arguing.  Politics and money, he
said to himself; money and politics.  That phrase came in handy.
But he could not understand the argument, which was already heated.
Never have I felt so lonely, he thought.  The old platitude about
solitude in a crowd was true; for hills and trees accept one; human
beings reject one.  He turned his back and pretended to read the
particulars of a desirable property at Bexhill which Patrick had
called for some reason "a manifesto."  "Running water in all the
bedrooms," he read.  He overheard scraps of talk.  That's Oxford,
that's Harrow, he continued, recognising the tricks of speech that
were caught at school and college.  It seemed to him that they were
still cutting little private jokes about Jones minor winning the
long jump; and old Foxy, or whatever the headmaster's name was.  It
was like hearing small boys at a private school, hearing these
young men talk politics.  "I'm right . . . you're wrong."  At their
age, he thought, he had been in the trenches; he had seen men
killed.  But was that a good education?  He shifted from one foot
to another.  At their age, he thought, he had been alone on a farm
sixty miles from a white man, in control of a herd of sheep.  But
was that a good education?  Anyhow it seemed to him, half hearing
their argument, looking at their gestures, catching their slang,
that they were all the same sort.  Public school and university, he
sized them up as he looked over his shoulder.  But where are the
Sweeps and the Sewer-men, the Seamstresses and the Stevedores? he
thought, making a list of trades that began with the letter S.  For
all Delia's pride in her promiscuity, he thought, glancing at the
people, there were only Dons and Duchesses, and what other words
begin with D? he asked himself, as he scrutinised the placard
again--Drabs and Drones?

He turned.  A nice fresh-faced boy with a freckled nose in ordinary
day clothes was looking at him.  If he didn't take care he would be
drawn in too.  Nothing would be easier than to join a society, to
sign what Patrick called "a manifesto."  But he did not believe in
joining societies, in signing manifestoes.  He turned back to the
desirable residence with its three-quarters of an acre of garden
and running water in all the bedrooms.  People met, he thought,
pretending to read, in hired halls.  And one of them stood on a
platform.  There was the pump-handle gesture; the wringing-wet-
clothes gesture; and then the voice, oddly detached from the little
figure and tremendously magnified by the loudspeaker, went booming
and bawling round the hall:  Justice!  Liberty!  For a moment, of
course, sitting among knees, wedged in tight, a ripple, a nice
emotional quiver, went over the skin; but next morning, he said to
himself as he glanced again at the house-agents' placard, there's
not an idea, not a phrase that would feed a sparrow.  What do they
mean by Justice and Liberty? he asked, all these nice young men
with two or three hundred a year.  Something's wrong, he thought;
there's a gap, a dislocation, between the word and the reality.  If
they want to reform the world, he thought, why not begin there, at
the centre, with themselves?  He turned on his heel and ran
straight into an old man in a white waistcoat.

"Hullo!" he said, holding out his hand.



It was his Uncle Edward.  He had the look of an insect whose body
has been eaten out, leaving only the wings, the shell.

"Very glad to see you back, North," said Edward, and shook him
warmly by the hand.

"Very glad," he repeated.  He was shy.  He was spare and thin.  He
looked as if his face had been carved and graved by a multitude of
fine instruments; as if it had been left out on a frosty night and
frozen over.  He threw his head back like a horse champing a bit;
but he was an old horse, a blue-eyed horse whose bit no longer
irked him.  His movements were from habit, not from feeling.  What
had he been doing all these years? North wondered, as they stood
there surveying each other.  Editing Sophocles?  What would happen
if Sophocles one of these days were edited?  What would they do
then, these eaten out hollow-shelled old men?

"You've filled out," said Edward, looking him up and down.  "You've
filled out," he repeated.

There was a subtle deference in his manner.  Edward, the scholar,
paid tribute to North, the soldier.  Yes, but they found it
difficult to talk.  He had the air of being stamped, North thought;
he had kept something, after all, out of the hubbub.

"Shan't we sit down?" said Edward, as if he wished to talk to him
seriously about interesting things.  They looked about for a quiet
place.  He had not frittered his time away talking to old red
setters and raising his gun, North thought, glancing about him, to
see if by chance there was a quiet place in the room where they
could sit down and talk.  But there were only two office stools
empty beside Eleanor over there in the corner.

She saw them and called out, "Oh, there's Edward!  I know there was
something I wanted to ask. . ." she began.

It was a relief that the interview with the headmaster should be
broken up by this impulsive, foolish old woman.  She was holding
out her pocket-handkerchief.

"I made a knot," she was saying.  Yes, there it was, a knot in her
pocket-handkerchief.

"Now what did I make a knot for?" she said, looking up.

"It is an admirable habit to make a knot," said Edward in his
courteous, clipped way, lowering himself a little stiffly onto the
chair beside her.  "But at the same time it is advisable. . . ."
He stopped.  That's what I like about him, North thought, taking
the other chair: he left half his sentence unfinished.

"It was to remind me--" said Eleanor putting her hand to her thick
crop of white hair.  Then she stopped.  What is it that makes him
look so calm, so carved, North thought, stealing a look at Edward,
who waited with admirable serenity for his sister to remember why
she had made a knot in her handkerchief.  There was something final
about him; he left half his sentences unfinished.  He hadn't
worried himself about politics and money, he thought.  There was
something sealed up, stated, about him.  Poetry and the past, was
it?  But as he fixed his eyes upon him, Edward smiled at his
sister.

"Well, Nell?" he said.

It was a quiet smile, a tolerant smile.

North broke in, for Eleanor was still ruminating over her knot.  "I
met a man at the Cape who was a tremendous admirer of yours, Uncle
Edward," he said.  The name came back to him--"Arbuthnot," he said.

"R. K.?" said Edward.  And he raised his hand to his head and
smiled.  It pleased him, that compliment.  He was vain; he was
touchy; he was--North stole a glance to add another impression--
established.  Glazed over with the smooth glossy varnish that those
in authority wear.  For he was now--what?  North could not
remember.  A professor?  A master?  Somebody who had an attitude
fixed on him, from which he could not relax any longer.  Still,
Arbuthnot, R. K., had said, with emotion, that he owed more to
Edward than to any man.

"He said he owed more to you than to any man," he said aloud.

Edward brushed aside the compliment; but it pleased him.  He had a
way of putting his hand to his head that North remembered.  And
Eleanor called him "Nigs."  She laughed at him; she preferred
failures, like Morris.  There she sat holding her pocket-
handkerchief in her hand, smiling, ironically, covertly, at some
memory.

"And what are your plans?" said Edward.  "You deserve a holiday."

There was something flattering in his manner, North thought, like a
schoolmaster welcoming back to school an old boy who had won
distinction.  But he meant it; he doesn't say what he doesn't mean,
North thought, and that was alarming too.  They were silent.

"Delia's got a wonderful lot of people here tonight, hasn't she?"
said Edward, turning to Eleanor.  They sat looking at the different
groups.  His clear blue eyes surveyed the scene amiably but
sardonically.  But what's he thinking, North asked himself.  He's
got something behind that mask, he thought.  Something that's kept
him clear of this muddle.  The past?  Poetry? he thought, looking
at Edward's distinct profile.  It was finer than he remembered.

"I'd like to brush up my classics," he said suddenly.  "Not that I
ever had much to brush," he added, foolishly, afraid of the
schoolmaster.

Edward did not seem to be listening.  He was raising his eyeglass
and letting it fall, as he looked at the queer jumble.  There his
head rested with the chin thrown up, on the back of his chair.  The
crowd, the noise, the clatter of knives and forks, made it
unnecessary to talk.  North stole another glance at him.  The past
and poetry, he said to himself, that's what I want to talk about,
he thought.  He wanted to say it aloud.  But Edward was too formed
and idiosyncratic; too black and white and linear, with his head
tilted up on the back of his chair, to ask him questions easily.

Now he was talking about Africa, and North wanted to talk about the
past and poetry.  There it was, he thought, locked up in that fine
head, the head that was like a Greek boy's head grown white; the
past and poetry.  Then why not prise it open?  Why not share it?
What's wrong with him, he thought, as he answered the usual
intelligent Englishman's questions about Africa and the state of
the country.  Why can't he flow?  Why can't he pull the string of
the shower bath?  Why's it all locked up, refrigerated?  Because
he's a priest, a mystery monger, he thought; feeling his coldness;
this guardian of beautiful words.

But Edward was speaking to him.

"We must arrange a date," he was saying, "next autumn."  He meant
it too.

"Yes," North said aloud, "I'd love to. . . .  In the autumn. . . ."
And he saw before him a house with creeper-shaded rooms, butlers
creeping, decanters, and some one handing a box of good cigars.



Unknown young men coming round with trays pressed different
eatables upon them.

"How very kind of you!" said Eleanor, taking a glass.  He himself
took a glass of some yellow liquid.  It was some kind of claret
cup, he supposed.  The little bubbles kept rising to the top and
exploding.  He watched them rise and explode.

"Who's that pretty girl," said Edward, inclining his head, "over
there, standing in the corner, talking to the youth?"

He was benignant and urbane.

"Aren't they lovely?" said Eleanor.  "Just what I was thinking. . . .
Everyone looks so young.  That's Maggie's daughter. . . .  But
who's that talking to Kitty?"

"That's Middleton," said Edward.  "What, don't you remember him?
You must have met him in the old days."

They chatted, basking there at their ease.  Spinners and sitters in
the sun, North thought, taking their ease when the day's work is
over; Eleanor and Edward each in his own niche, with his hands on
the fruit, tolerant, assured.

He watched the bubbles rising in the yellow liquid.  For them it's
all right, he thought; they've had their day: but not for him, not
for his generation.  For him a life modelled on the jet (he was
watching the bubbles rise), on the spring, of the hard leaping
fountain; another life; a different life.  Not halls and
reverberating megaphones; not marching in step after leaders, in
herds, groups, societies, caparisoned.  No; to begin inwardly, and
let the devil take the outer form, he thought, looking up at a
young man with a fine forehead and a weak chin.  Not black shirts,
green shirts, red shirts--always posing in the public eye; that's
all poppycock.  Why not down barriers and simplify?  But a world,
he thought, that was all one jelly, one mass, would be a rice
pudding world, a white counterpane world.  To keep the emblems and
tokens of North Pargiter--the man Maggie laughs at; the Frenchman
holding his hat; but at the same time spread out, make a new ripple
in human consciousness, be the bubble and the stream, the stream
and the bubble--myself and the world together--he raised his glass.
Anonymously, he said, looking at the clear yellow liquid.  But what
do I mean, he wondered--I, to whom ceremonies are suspect, and
religion's dead; who don't fit, as the man said, don't fit in
anywhere?  He paused.  There was the glass in his hand; in his mind
a sentence.  And he wanted to make other sentences.  But how can I,
he thought--he looked at Eleanor, who sat with a silk handkerchief
in her hands--unless I know what's solid, what's true; in my life,
in other people's lives?



"Runcorn's boy," Eleanor suddenly ejaculated.  "The son of the
porter at my flat," she explained.  She had untied the knot in her
handkerchief.

"The son of the porter at your flat," Edward repeated.  His eyes
were like a field on which the sun rests in winter, North thought,
looking up--the winter's sun, that has no heat left in it but some
pale beauty.

"Commissionaire they call him, I think," she said.

"How I hate that word!" said Edward with a little shudder.
"Porter's good English, isn't it?"

"That's what I say," said Eleanor.  "The son of the PORTER at my
flat. . . .  Well, he wants, they want him to go to college.  So I
said if I saw you, I'd ask you--"

"Of course, of course," said Edward kindly.

And that's all right, North said to himself.  That's the human
voice at its natural speaking level.  Of course, of course, he
repeated.

"He wants to go to college, does he?" Edward went on.  "What
examinations has he passed, eh?"

What examinations has he passed, eh? North repeated.  He repeated
that too, but critically, as if he were actor and critic; he
listened but he commented.  He surveyed the thin yellow liquid in
which the bubbles rose more slowly, one by one.  Eleanor did not
know what examinations he had passed.  And what was I thinking?
North asked himself.  He felt that he had been in the middle of a
jungle; in the heart of darkness; cutting his way towards the
light; but provided only with broken sentences, single words, with
which to break through the briar-bush of human bodies, human wills
and voices, that bent over him, binding him, blinding him. . . .
He listened.

"Well then, tell him to come and see me," said Edward, briskly.

"But that's asking too much of you, Edward?" Eleanor protested.

"That's what I'm for," said Edward.

That's the right tone of voice too, North thought.  Not carapaced--
the words "caparison" and "carapace" collided in his mind, and made
a new word that was no word.  What I mean is, he added, taking a
drink of his claret cup, underneath there's the fountain; the sweet
nut.  The fruit, the fountain that's in all of us; in Edward; in
Eleanor; so why caparison ourselves on top?  He looked up.

A big man had stopped in front of them.  He bent over and very
politely gave Eleanor his hand.  He had to bend, for his white
waistcoat enclosed so magnificent a sphere.  "Alas," he was saying
in a voice that was oddly mellifluous for one of his bulk, "I'd
love nothing more; but I have a meeting at ten tomorrow morning."
They were inviting him to sit down and talk.  He was tittupping up
and down on his little feet in front of them.

"Throw it over!" said Eleanor, smiling up at him, just as she used
to smile when she was a girl with her brother's friends, thought
North.  Then why hadn't she married one of them, he wondered.  Why
do we hide all the things that matter? he asked himself.

"And leave my directors cooling their heels?  As much as my place
is worth!" the old friend was saying, and swung round on his heel
with the agility of a trained elephant.

"Seems a long time since he acted in the Greek play, doesn't it?"
said Edward.  ". . . in a toga," he added with a grin, following
the well-rounded person of the great railway magnate as he went
with a certain celerity, for he was a perfect man of the world,
through the crowd to the door.

"That's Chipperfield, the great railway man," he explained to
North.  "A very remarkable fellow," he went on.  "Son of a railway
porter."  He made little pauses between each sentence.  "Done it
all off his own bat. . . .  A delightful house . . .  Perfectly
restored. . . .  Two or three hundred acres, I suppose. . . .  Has
his shooting. . . .  Asks me to direct his reading. . . .  And buys
old masters."

"And buys old masters," North repeated.  The deft little sentences
seemed to build up a pagoda; sparely but accurately; and through it
all ran some queer breath of mockery tinged with affection.

"Shams, I should think," Eleanor laughed.

"Well, we needn't go into that," Edward chuckled.  Then they were
silent.  The pagoda floated off.  Chipperfield had vanished through
the door.



"How nice this drink is," Eleanor said above his head.  North could
see her glass held at the level of his head on her knee.  A thin
green leaf floated on top of it.  "I hope it's not intoxicating?"
she said, raising it.

North took up his glass again.  What was I thinking last time I
looked at it? he asked himself.  A block had formed in his forehead
as if two thoughts had collided and had stopped the passage of the
rest.  His mind was a blank.  He swayed the liquid from side to
side.  He was in the middle of a dark forest.

"So, North . . ."  His own name roused him with a start.  It was
Edward speaking.  He jerked forward.  ". . . you want to brush up
your classics, do you?" Edward went on.  "I'm glad to hear you say
that.  There's a lot in those old fellows.  But the younger
generation," he paused, ". . .  don't seem to want 'em."

"How foolish!" said Eleanor.  "I was reading one of them the other
day . . . the one you translated.  Now which was it?"  She paused.
She never could remember names.  "The one about the girl who . . ."

"The Antigone?" Edward suggested.

"Yes!  The Antigone!" she exclaimed.  "And I thought to myself,
just what you say, Edward--how true--how beautiful. . . ."

She broke off, as if afraid to continue.

Edward nodded.  He paused.  Then suddenly he jerked his head back
and said some words in Greek:  "[Greek text]."

North looked up.

"Translate it," he said.

Edward shook his head.  "It's the language," he said.

Then he shut up.  It's no go, North thought.  He can't say what he
wants to say; he's afraid.  They're all afraid; afraid of being
laughed at; afraid of giving themselves away.  He's afraid too, he
thought, looking at the young man with a fine forehead and a weak
chin who was gesticulating too emphatically.  We're all afraid of
each other, he thought; afraid of what?  Of criticism; of laughter;
of people who think differently. . . .  He's afraid of me because
I'm a farmer (and he saw again his round face; high cheek-bones and
small brown eyes).  And I'm afraid of him because he's clever.  He
looked at the big forehead, from which the hair was already
receding.  That's what separates us; fear, he thought.

He shifted his position.  He wanted to get up and talk to him.
Delia had said, "Don't wait to be introduced."  But it was
difficult to speak to a man whom he did not know, and say:  "What's
this knot in the middle of my forehead?  Untie it."  For he had had
enough of thinking alone.  Thinking alone tied knots in the middle
of the forehead; thinking alone bred pictures, foolish pictures.
The man was moving off.  He must make the effort.  Yet he
hesitated.  He felt repelled and attracted, attracted and repelled.
He began to rise; but before he had got on his feet somebody
thumped on a table with a fork.



A large man sitting at a table in the corner was thumping on the
table with his fork.  He was leaning forward as if he wanted to
attract attention, as if he were about to make a speech.  It was
the man Peggy called Brown; the others called Nicholas; whose real
name he did not know.  Perhaps he was a little drunk.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" he said.  "Ladies and gentlemen!" he
repeated rather more loudly.

"What, a speech?" said Edward quizzically.  He half turned his
chair; he raised his eyeglass, which hung on a black silk ribbon as
if it were a foreign order.

People were buzzing about with plates and glasses.  They were
stumbling over cushions on the floor.  A girl pitched head
foremost.

"Hurt yourself?" said a young man, stretching out his hand.

No, she had not hurt herself.  But the interruption had distracted
attention from the speech.  A buzz of talk had risen like the buzz
of flies over sugar.  Nicholas sat down again.  He was lost
apparently in contemplation of the red stone in his ring; or of the
strewn flowers; the white, waxy flowers, the pale, semi-transparent
flowers, the crimson flowers that were so full-blown that the gold
heart showed, and the petals had fallen and lay among the hired
knives and forks, the cheap tumblers on the table.  Then he roused
himself.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" he began.  Again he thumped the table with
his fork.  There was a momentary lull.  Rose marched across the
room.

"Going to make a speech, are you?" she demanded.  "Go on, I like
hearing speeches."  She stood beside him, with her hand hollowed
round her ear like a military man.  Again the buzz of talk had
broken out.

"Silence!" she exclaimed.  She took a knife and rapped on the
table.

"Silence!  Silence!"  She rapped again.

Martin crossed the room.

"What's Rose making such a noise about?" he asked.

"I'm asking for silence!" she said, flourishing her knife in his
face.  "This gentleman wants to make a speech!"

But he had sat down and was regarding his ring with equanimity.

"Isn't she the very spit and image," said Martin, laying his hand
on Rose's shoulder and turning to Eleanor as if to confirm his
words, "of old Uncle Pargiter of Pargiter's Horse?"

"Well, I'm proud of it!" said Rose, brandishing her knife in his
face.  "I'm proud of my family; proud of my country; proud of . . ."

"Your sex?" he interrupted her.

"I am," she asseverated.  "And what about you?" she went on,
tapping him on the shoulder.  "Proud of yourself, are you?"

"Don't quarrel, children, don't quarrel!" cried Eleanor, giving her
chair a little edge nearer.  "They always would quarrel," she said,
"always . . . always. . . ."

"She was a horrid little spitfire," said Martin, squatting down on
the floor, and looking up at Rose, "with her hair scraped off her
forehead . . ."

". . . wearing a pink frock," Rose added.  She sat down abruptly,
holding her knife erect in her hand.  "A pink frock; a pink frock,"
she repeated, as if the words recalled something.

"But go on with your speech, Nicholas," said Eleanor, turning to
him.  He shook his head.

"Let us talk about pink frocks," he smiled.

". . . in the drawing-room at Abercorn Terrace, when we were
children," said Rose.  "D'you remember?"  She looked at Martin.  He
nodded his head.

"In the drawing-room at Abercorn Terrace . . ." said Delia.  She
was going from table to table with a great jug of claret cup.  She
stopped in front of them.  "Abercorn Terrace!" she exclaimed,
filling a glass.  She flung her head back and looked for a moment
astonishingly young, handsome, and defiant.

"It was Hell!" she exclaimed.  "It was Hell!" she repeated.

"Oh come, Delia . . ." Martin protested, holding out his glass to
be filled.

"It was Hell," she said, dropping her Irish manner, and speaking
quite simply, as she poured out the drink.

"D'you know," she said, looking at Eleanor, "when I go to
Paddington, I always say to the man, 'Drive the other way round!'"

"That's enough . . ." Martin stopped her; his glass was full.  "I
hated it too . . ." he began.

But here Kitty Lasswade advanced upon them.  She held her glass in
front of her as though it were a bauble.

"What's Martin hating now?" she said, facing him.

A polite gentleman pushed forward a little gilt chair upon which
she sat down.

"He always was a hater," she said, holding her glass out to be
filled.

"What was it you hated that night, Martin, when you dined with us?"
she asked him.  "I remember how angry you made me. . . ."

She smiled at him.  He had grown cherubic; pink and plump; with his
hair brushed back like a waiter's.

"Hated?  I never hated anybody," he protested.

"My heart's full of love; my heart's full of kindness," he laughed,
waving his glass at her.

"Nonsense," said Kitty.  "When you were young you hated . . .
everything!" she flung her hand out.  "My house . . . my
friends. . . ."  She broke off with a quick little sigh.  She
saw them again--the men filing in; the women pinching some dress
between their thumbs and fingers.  She lived alone now, in the
north.

". . . and I daresay I'm better off as I am," she added, half to
herself, "with just a boy to chop up wood."

There was a pause.

"Now let him get on with his speech," said Eleanor.

"Yes.  Get on with your speech!" said Rose.  Again she rapped her
knife on the table; again he half rose.

"Going to make a speech, is he?" said Kitty, turning to Edward who
had drawn his chair up beside her.

"The only place where oratory is now practised as an art . . ."
Edward began.  Then he paused, drew his chair a little closer, and
adjusted his glasses, ". . .  is the church," he added.

That's why I didn't marry you, Kitty said to herself.  How the
voice, the supercilious voice, brought it back! the tree half
fallen; rain falling; undergraduates calling; bells tolling; she
and her mother. . . .

But Nicholas had risen.  He took a deep breath which expanded his
shirt front.  With one hand he fumbled with his fob; the other he
flung out with an oratorical gesture.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" he began again.  "In the name of all who
have enjoyed themselves tonight. . . ."

"Speak up!  Speak up!" the young men cried who were standing in the
window.

("Is he a foreigner?" Kitty whispered to Eleanor.)

". . . in the name of all who have enjoyed themselves tonight," he
repeated more loudly, "I wish to thank our host and hostess. . . ."

"Oh, don't thank me!" said Delia brushing past them with her empty
jug.

Again the speech was brought to the ground.  He must be a
foreigner, Kitty thought to herself, because he has no self-
consciousness.  There he stood holding his wine-glass and smiling.

"Go on, go on," she urged him.  "Don't mind them."  She was in the
mood for a speech.  A speech was a good thing at parties.  It gave
them a fillip.  It gave them a finish.  She rapped her glass on the
table.

"It's very nice of you," said Delia, trying to push past him, but
he had laid his hand on her arm, "but don't thank me."

"But Delia," he expostulated, still holding her, "it's not what YOU
want; it's what WE want.  And it is fitting," he continued, waving
his hand out, "when our hearts are full of gratitude. . ."

Now he's getting into his stride, Kitty thought.  I daresay he's a
bit of an orator.  Most foreigners are.

". . . when our hearts are full of gratitude," he repeated,
touching one finger.

"What for?" said a voice abruptly.

Nicholas stopped again.

("Who is that dark man?" Kitty whispered to Eleanor.  "I've been
wondering all the evening."

"Renny," Eleanor whispered.  "Renny," she repeated.)

"What for?" said Nicholas.  "That is what I am about to tell
you. . . ."  He paused, and drew a deep breath which again expanded
his waistcoat.  His eyes beamed; he seemed full of spontaneous
subterraneous benevolence.  But here a head popped up over the edge
of the table; a hand swept up a fistful of flower petals; and a
voice cried:

"Red Rose, thorny Rose, brave Rose, tawny Rose!"  The petals were
thrown, fan-shape, over the stout old woman who was sitting on the
edge of her chair.  She looked up in surprise.  Petals had fallen
on her.  She brushed them where they had lodged upon the
prominences of her person.  "Thank you!  Thank you!" she exclaimed.
Then she took up a flower and beat it energetically upon the edge
of the table.  "But I want my speech!" she said, looking at
Nicholas.

"No, no," he said.  "This is not a time for making speeches," and
sat down again.

"Let's drink then," said Martin.  He raised his glass.  "Pargiter
of Pargiter's Horse!" he said.  "I drink to her!"  He put his glass
down with a thump on the table.

"Oh, if you're all drinking healths," said Kitty, "I'll drink too.
Rose, your health.  Rose is a fine fellow," she said, raising her
glass.  "But Rose was wrong," she added.  "Force is always wrong,--
don't you agree with me, Edward?"  She tapped him on the knee.  I'd
forgotten the War, she muttered half to herself.  "Still," she said
aloud, "Rose had the courage of her convictions.  Rose went to
prison.  And I drink to her!"  She drank.

"The same to you, Kitty," said Rose, bowing to her.

"She smashed his window," Martin jeered at her, "and then she
helped him to smash other people's windows.  Where's your
decoration, Rose?"

"In a cardboard box on the mantelpiece," said Rose.  "You can't get
a rise out of me at this time of day, my good fellow."

"But I wish you had let Nicholas finish his speech," said Eleanor.



Down through the ceiling, muted and far away, came the preliminary
notes of another dance.  The young people, hastily swallowing what
remained in their glasses, rose and began to move off upstairs.
Soon there was the sound of feet thudding, rhythmically, heavily on
the floor above.

"Another dance?" said Eleanor.  It was a waltz.  "When we were
young," she said, looking at Kitty, "we used to dance. . . ."  The
tune seemed to take her words and to repeat them--when I was young
I used to dance--I used to dance. . . .

"And how I hated it!" said Kitty, looking at her fingers, which
were short and pricked.  "How nice it is," she said, "not to be
young!  How nice not to mind what people think!  Now one can live
as one likes," she added, ". . . now that one's seventy."

She paused.  She raised her eyebrows as if she remembered
something.  "Pity one can't live again," she said.  But she broke
off.

"Aren't we going to have our speech after all, Mr--?" she said,
looking at Nicholas, whose name she did not know.  He sat gazing
benevolently in front of him, paddling his hands among the flower
petals.

"What's the good?" he said.  "Nobody wants to listen."  They
listened to the feet thudding upstairs, and to the music repeating,
it seemed to Eleanor, when I was young I used to dance, all men
loved me when I was young. . . .

"But I want a speech!" said Kitty in her authoritative manner.  It
was true; she wanted something--something that gave a fillip, a
finish--what she scarcely knew.  But not the past--not memories.
The present; the future; that was what she wanted.

"There's Peggy!" said Eleanor, looking round.  She was sitting on
the edge of a table, eating a ham sandwich.

"Come, Peggy!" she called out.  "Come and talk to us!"

"Speak for the younger generation, Peggy!" said Lady Lasswade,
shaking hands.

"But I'm not the younger generation," said Peggy.  "And I've made
my speech already," she said.  "I made a fool of myself upstairs,"
she said, sinking down on the floor at Eleanor's feet.

"Then, North . . ." said Eleanor, looking down on the parting of
North's hair as he sat on the floor beside her.

"Yes, North," said Peggy, looking at him across her aunt's knee.
"North says we talk of nothing but money and politics," she added.
"Tell us what we ought to do."  He started.  He had been dozing
off, dazed by the music and voices.  What we ought to do? he said
to himself, waking up.  What ought we to do?

He jerked up into a sitting posture.  He saw Peggy's face looking
at him.  Now she was smiling; her face was gay; it reminded him of
his grandmother's face in the picture.  But he saw it as he had
seen it upstairs--scarlet, puckered--as if she were about to burst
into tears.  It was her face that was true; not her words.  But
only her words returned to him--to live differently--differently.
He paused.  This is what needs courage, he said to himself; to
speak the truth.  She was listening.  The old people were already
gossiping about their own affairs.

". . . It's a nice little house," Kitty was saying.  "An old mad
woman used to live there. . . .  You'll have to come and stay with
me, Nell.  In the spring. . . ."

Peggy was watching him over the rim of her ham sandwich.

"What you said was true," he blurted out, ". . .  quite true."  It
was what she meant that was true, he corrected himself; her
feeling, not her words.  He felt her feeling now; it was not
about him; it was about other people; about another world, a new
world. . . .

The old aunts and uncles were gossiping above him.

"What was the name of the man I used to like so much at Oxford?"
Lady Lasswade was saying.  He could see her silver body bending
towards Edward.

"The man you liked at Oxford?" Edward was repeating.  "I thought
you never liked anyone at Oxford.  . . ."  And they laughed.

But Peggy was waiting, she was watching him.  He saw again the
glass with the bubbles rising; he felt again the constriction of a
knot in his forehead.  He wished there were someone, infinitely
wise and good, to think for him, to answer for him.  But the young
man with the receding forehead had vanished.

". . . To live differently . . . differently," he repeated.  Those
were her words; they did not altogether fit his meaning; but he had
to use them.  Now I've made a fool of myself too, he thought, as a
ripple of some disagreeable sensation went across his back as if a
knife had sliced it, and he leant against the wall.

"Yes, it was Robson!" Lady Lasswade exclaimed.  Her trumpet voice
rang out over his head.

"How one forgets things!" she went on.  "Of course--Robson.  That
was his name.  And the girl I used to like--Nelly?  The girl who
was going to be a doctor?"

"Died, I think," said Edward.

"Died, did she--died--" said Lady Lasswade.  She paused for a
moment.  "Well, I wish you'd make your speech," she said, turning
and looking down at North.

He drew himself back.  No more speech-making for me, he thought.
He had his glass in his hand still.  It was still half full of pale
yellow liquid.  The bubbles had ceased to rise.  The wine was clear
and still.  Stillness and solitude, he thought to himself; silence
and solitude . . . that's the only element in which the mind is
free now.

Silence and solitude, he repeated; silence and solitude.  His eyes
half closed themselves.  He was tired; he was dazed; people talked;
people talked.  He would detach himself, generalise himself,
imagine that he was lying in a great space on a blue plain with
hills on the rim of the horizon.  He stretched out his feet.  There
were the sheep cropping; slowly tearing the grass; advancing first
one stiff leg and then another.  And babbling--babbling.  He made
no sense of what they were saying.  Through his half-open eyes he
saw hands holding flowers--thin hands, fine hands; but hands that
belonged to no one.  And were they flowers the hands held?  Or
mountains?  Blue mountains with violet shadows?  Then petals fell.
Pink, yellow, white with violet shadows, the petals fell.  They
fall and fall and cover all, he murmured.  And there was the stem
of a wine-glass; the rim of a plate; and a bowl of water.  The
hands went on picking up flower after flower; that was a white
rose; that was a yellow rose; that was a rose with violet valleys
in its petals.  There they hung, many folded, many coloured,
drooping over the rim of the bowl.  And petals fell.  There they
lay, violet and yellow, little shallops, boats on a river.  And he
was floating, and drifting, in a shallop, in a petal, down a river
into silence, into solitude . . . which is the worst torture, the
words came back to him as if a voice had spoken them, that human
beings can inflict. . . .

"Wake up, North . . . we want your speech!" a voice interrupted
him.  Kitty's red handsome face was hanging over him.

"Maggie!" he exclaimed, pulling himself up.  It was she who was
sitting there, putting flowers into water.  "Yes, it's Maggie's
turn to speak," said Nicholas, putting his hand on her knee.

"Speak, speak!" Renny urged her.

But she shook her head.  Laughter took her and shook her.  She
laughed, throwing her head back as if she were possessed by some
genial spirit outside herself that made her bend and rise, as a
tree, North thought, is tossed and bent by the wind.  No idols, no
idols, no idols, her laughter seemed to chime as if the tree were
hung with innumerable bells, and he laughed too.



Their laughter ceased.  Feet thudded, dancing on the floor above.
A siren hooted on the river.  A van crashed down the street in the
distance.  There was a rush and quiver of sound; something seemed
to be released; it was as if the life of the day were about to
begin, and this were the chorus, the cry, the chirp, the stir,
which salutes the London dawn.

Kitty turned to Nicholas.

"And what was your speech going to have been about, Mr . . . I'm
afraid I don't know your name?" she said.

". . . the one that was interrupted?"

"My speech?" he laughed.  "It was to have been a miracle!" he said.
"A masterpiece!  But how can one speak when one is always
interrupted?  I begin: I say, Let us give thanks.  Then Delia says,
Don't thank me.  I begin again: I say, Let us give thanks to
someone, to somebody . . .  And Renny says, What for?  I begin
again, and look--Eleanor is sound asleep."  (He pointed at her.)
"So what's the good?"

"Oh, but there is some good--" Kitty began.

She still wanted something--some finish, some fillip--what she did
not know.  And it was getting late.  She must go.

"Tell me, privately, what you were going to have said, Mr--?" she
asked him.

"What I was going to have said?  I was going to have said--" he
paused and stretched his hand out; he touched each finger
separately.

"First I was going to have thanked our host and hostess.  Then I
was going to have thanked this house--" he waved his hand round the
room hung with the placards of the house agent, "--which has
sheltered the lovers, the creators, the men and women of goodwill.
And finally--" he took his glass in his hand, "I was going to drink
to the human race.  The human race," he continued, raising his
glass to his lips, "which is now in its infancy, may it grow to
maturity!  Ladies and gentlemen!" he exclaimed, half rising and
expanding his waistcoat, "I drink to that!"

He brought his glass down with a thump on the table.  It broke.



"That's the thirteenth glass broken tonight!" said Delia, coming up
and stopping in front of them.  "But don't mind--don't mind.
They're very cheap--glasses."

"What's very cheap?" Eleanor murmured.  She half opened her eyes.
But where was she?  In what room?  In which of the innumerable
rooms?  Always there were rooms; always there were people.  Always
from the beginning of time. . . .  She shut her hands on the coins
she was holding, and again she was suffused with a feeling of
happiness.  Was it because this had survived--this keen sensation
(she was waking up) and the other thing, the solid object--she saw
an ink-corroded walrus--had vanished?  She opened her eyes wide.
Here she was; alive; in this room, with living people.  She saw all
the heads in a circle.  At first they were without identity.  Then
she recognised them.  That was Rose; that was Martin; that was
Morris.  He had hardly any hair on the top of his head.  There was
a curious pallor on his face.

There was a curious pallor on all their faces as she looked round.
The brightness had gone out of the electric lights; the table-
cloths looked whiter.  North's head--he was sitting on the floor at
her feet--was rimmed with whiteness.  His shirt-front was a little
crumpled.

He was sitting on the floor at Edward's feet with his hands bound
round his knees, and he gave little jerks and looked up at him as
if he appealed to him about something.

"Uncle Edward," she heard him say, "tell me this . . ."

He was like a child asking to be told a story.

"Tell me this," he repeated, giving another little jerk.  "You're a
scholar.  About the classics now.  Aeschylus.  Sophocles.  Pindar."

Edward bent towards him.

"And the chorus," North jerked on again.  She leant towards them.
"The chorus--" North repeated.

"My dear boy," she heard Edward say as he smiled benignly down at
him, "don't ask me.  I was never a great hand at that.  No, if I'd
had my way"--he paused and passed his hand over his forehead--"I
should have been . . ."  A burst of laughter drowned his words.
She could not catch the end of the sentence.  What had he said--
what had he wished to be?  She had lost his words.

There must be another life, she thought, sinking back into her
chair, exasperated.  Not in dreams; but here and now, in this room,
with living people.  She felt as if she were standing on the edge
of a precipice with her hair blown back; she was about to grasp
something that just evaded her.  There must be another life, here
and now, she repeated.  This is too short, too broken.  We know
nothing, even about ourselves.  We're only just beginning, she
thought, to understand, here and there.  She hollowed her hands in
her lap, just as Rose had hollowed hers round her ears.  She held
her hands hollowed; she felt that she wanted to enclose the present
moment; to make it stay; to fill it fuller and fuller, with the
past, the present and the future, until it shone, whole, bright,
deep with understanding.

"Edward," she began, trying to attract his attention.  But he was
not listening to her; he was telling North some old college story.
It's useless, she thought, opening her hands.  It must drop.  It
must fall.  And then? she thought.  For her too there would be the
endless night; the endless dark.  She looked ahead of her as though
she saw opening in front of her a very long dark tunnel.  But,
thinking of the dark, something baffled her; in fact it was growing
light.  The blinds were white.



There was a stir in the room.

Edward turned to her.

"Who are THEY?" he asked her, pointing to the door.

She looked.  Two children stood in the door.  Delia had her hands
on their shoulders as if to encourage them.  She was leading them
over to the table in order to give them something to eat.  They
looked awkward and clumsy.

Eleanor glanced at their hands, at their clothes, at the shape of
their ears.  "The children of the caretaker, I should think," she
said.  Yes, Delia was cutting slices of cake for them, and they
were larger slices of cake than she would have cut had they been
the children of her own friends.  The children took the slices and
stared at them with a curious fixed stare as if they were fierce.
But perhaps they were frightened, because she had brought them up
from the basement into the drawing-room.

"Eat it!" said Delia, giving them a little pat.

They began to munch slowly, gazing solemnly round them.

"Hullo, children!" cried Martin, beckoning to them.  They stared at
him solemnly.

"Haven't you got a name?" he said.  They went on eating in silence.
He began to fumble in his pocket.

"Speak!" he said.  "Speak!"

"The younger generation," said Peggy, "don't mean to speak."

They turned their eyes on her now; but they went on munching.  "No
school tomorrow?" she said.  They shook their heads from side to
side.

"Hurrah!" said Martin.  He held the coins in his hand; pressed
between his thumb and finger.  "Now--sing a song for sixpence!" he
said.

"Yes.  Weren't you taught something at school?" Peggy asked.

They stared at her but remained silent.  They had stopped eating.
They were a centre of a little group.  They swept their eyes over
the grown-up people for a moment, then, each giving the other a
little nudge, they burst into song:


     Etho passo tanno hai,
     Fai donk to tu do,
     Mai to, kai to, lai to see
     Toh dom to tuh do--


That was what it sounded like.  Not a word was recognisable.  The
distorted sounds rose and sank as if they followed a tune.  They
stopped.

They stood with their hands behind their backs.  Then with one
impulse they attacked the next verse:


     Fanno to par, etto to mar,
     Timin tudo, tido,
     Foll to gar in, mitno to par,
     Eido, teido, meido--


They sang the second verse more fiercely than the first.  The
rhythm seemed to rock and the unintelligible words ran themselves
together almost into a shriek.  The grown-up people did not know
whether to laugh or to cry.  Their voices were so harsh; the accent
was so hideous.

They burst out again:


     Chree to gay ei,
     Geeray didax. . . .


Then they stopped.  It seemed to be in the middle of a verse.  They
stood there grinning, silent, looking at the floor.  Nobody knew
what to say.  There was something horrible in the noise they made.
It was so shrill, so discordant, and so meaningless.  Then old
Patrick ambled up.

"Ah, that's very nice, that's very nice.  Thank you, my dears," he
said in his genial way, fiddling with his toothpick.  The children
grinned at him.  Then they began to make off.  As they sidled past
Martin, he slipped coins into their hands.  Then they made a dash
for the door.

"But what the devil were they singing?" said Hugh Gibbs.  "I
couldn't understand a word of it, I must confess."  He held his
hands to the sides of his large white waistcoat.

"Cockney accent, I suppose," said Patrick.  "What they teach 'em at
school, you know."

"But it was . . ." Eleanor began.  She stopped.  What was it?  As
they stood there they had looked so dignified; yet they had made
this hideous noise.  The contrast between their faces and their
voices was astonishing; it was impossible to find one word for the
whole.  "Beautiful?" she said, with a note of interrogation,
turning to Maggie.

"Extraordinarily," said Maggie.

But Eleanor was not sure that they were thinking of the same thing.



She gathered together her gloves, her bag and two or three coppers,
and got up.  The room was full of a queer pale light.  Objects
seemed to be rising out of their sleep, out of their disguise, and
to be assuming the sobriety of daily life.  The room was making
ready for its use as an estate agent's office.  The tables were
becoming office tables; their legs were the legs of office tables,
and yet they were still strewn with plates and glasses, with roses,
lilies and carnations.

"It's time to go," she said, crossing the room.  Delia had gone to
the window.  Now she jerked the curtains open.

"The dawn!" she exclaimed rather melodramatically.

The shapes of houses appeared across the square.  Their blinds were
all drawn; they seemed fast asleep still in the morning pallor.

"The dawn!" said Nicholas, getting up and stretching himself.  He
too walked across to the window.  Renny followed him.

"Now for the peroration," he said, standing with him in the window.
"The dawn--the new day--"

He pointed at the trees, at the roofs, at the sky.

"No," said Nicholas, holding back the curtain.  "There you are
mistaken.  There is going to be no peroration--no peroration!" he
exclaimed, throwing his arm out, "because there was no speech."

"But the dawn has risen," said Renny, pointing at the sky.



It was a fact.  The sun had risen.  The sky between the chimneys
looked extraordinarily blue.

"And I am going to bed," said Nicholas after a pause.  He turned
away.

"Where is Sara?" he said, looking round him.  There she was curled
up in a corner with her head against a table asleep apparently.

"Wake your sister, Magdalena," he said, turning to Maggie.  Maggie
looked at her.  Then she took a flower from the table and tossed it
at her.  She half-opened her eyes.  "It's time," said Maggie,
touching her on the shoulder.  "Time, is it?" she sighed.  She
yawned and stretched herself.  She fixed her eyes on Nicholas as if
she were bringing him back to the field of vision.  Then she
laughed.

"Nicholas!" she exclaimed.

"Sara!" he replied.  They smiled at each other.  Then he helped her
up and she balanced herself uncertainly against her sister, and
rubbed her eyes.

"How strange," she murmured, looking round heir, ". . . how
strange. . . ."

There were the smeared plates, and the empty wine-glasses; the
petals and the bread crumbs.  In the mixture of lights they looked
prosaic but unreal; cadaverous but brilliant.  And there against
the window, gathered in a group, were the old brothers and sisters.

"Look, Maggie," she whispered, turning to her sister, "Look!"  She
pointed at the Pargiters, standing in the window.



The group in the window, the men in their black-and-white evening
dress, the women in their crimsons, golds and silvers, wore a
statuesque air for a moment, as if they were carved in stone.
Their dresses fell in stiff sculptured folds.  Then they moved;
they changed their attitudes; they began to talk.

"Can't I give you a lift back, Nell?" Kitty Lasswade was saying.
"I've a car waiting."

Eleanor did not answer.  She was looking at the curtained houses
across the square.  The windows were spotted with gold.  Everything
looked clean swept, fresh and virginal.  The pigeons were shuffling
on the tree tops.

"I've a car . . ." Kitty repeated.

"Listen . . ." said Eleanor, raising her hand.  Upstairs they were
playing "God save the King" on the gramophone; but it was the
pigeons she meant; they were crooning.

"That's wood pigeons, isn't it?" said Kitty.  She put her head on
one side to listen.  Take two coos, Taffy, take two coos . . .
tak . . . they were crooning.

"Wood pigeons?" said Edward, putting his hand to his ear.

"There on the tree tops," said Kitty.  The green-blue birds were
shuffling about on the branches, pecking and crooning to
themselves.

Morris brushed the crumbs off his waistcoat.

"What an hour for us old fogies to be out of bed!" he said.  "I
haven't seen the sun rise since . . . since. . . ."

"Ah, but when we were young," said old Patrick, slapping him on the
shoulder, "we thought nothing of making a night of it!  I remember
going to Covent Garden and buying roses for a certain lady. . ."

Delia smiled as if some romance, her own or another's, had been
recalled to her.

"And I . . ." Eleanor began.  She stopped.  She saw an empty milk
jug and leaves falling.  Then it had been autumn.  Now it was
summer.  The sky was a faint blue; the roofs were tinged purple
against the blue; the chimneys were a pure brick red.  An air of
ethereal calm and simplicity lay over everything.

"And all the tubes have stopped, and all the omnibuses," she said
turning round.  "How are we going to get home?"

"We can walk," said Rose.  "Walking won't do us any harm."

"Not on a fine summer morning," said Martin.

A breeze went through the square.  In the stillness they could hear
the branches rustle as they rose slightly, and fell, and shook a
wave of green light through the air.

Then the door burst open.  Couple after couple came flocking in,
dishevelled, gay, to look for their cloaks and their hats, to say
good-night.

"It's been so good of you to come!" Delia exclaimed, turning
towards them with her hands outstretched.

"Thank you--thank you for coming!" she cried.

"And look at Maggie's bunch!" she said, taking a bunch of many
coloured flowers that Maggie held out to her.

"How beautifully you've arranged them!" she said.  "Look, Eleanor!"
She turned to her sister.

But Eleanor was standing with her back to them.  She was watching a
taxi that was gliding slowly round the square.  It stopped in front
of a house two doors down.

"Aren't they lovely?" said Delia, holding out the flowers.

Eleanor started.

"The roses?  Yes . . ." she said.  But she was watching the cab.  A
young man had got out; he paid the driver.  Then a girl in a tweed
travelling suit followed him.  He fitted his latch-key to the door.
"There," Eleanor murmured, as he opened the door and they stood for
a moment on the threshold.  "There!" she repeated, as the door shut
with a little thud behind them.

Then she turned round into the room.  "And now?" she said, looking
at Morris, who was drinking the last drops of a glass of wine.
"And now?" she asked, holding out her hands to him.



The sun had risen, and the sky above the houses wore an air of
extraordinary beauty, simplicity and peace.



THE END